Presented  to  the 

LIBRARY  of  the 
UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 

Ms.   Ronwen  Stock 


y 


.22. 


THE    TEMPLE. 


►' 


THE     TEMPLE. 

SACRED  POEMS  AND  PRIVATE 
EJACULATIONS. 

BY  GEORGE  HERBERT. 

Being  a  Facfmile  Reprint  of  the  Firji  Edition 

WITH    AN   INTRODUCTION 

BY   THE    REV.  ALEXANDER   B.   GROSART, 

EDITOR  OF  "Herbert's  complete  works,  in  verse  and  prose," 

AND  THE  ALDINE  EDITION  OF  **  HERBERT*! 
POEMS,"  ETC.,  ETC. 


LONDON: 
ELLIOT    STOCK,  62,  Paternoster  Row. 


Of 


CHISWICK  press:— C.   WHITTINGHAM,  TOOKS  COURT, 
CHANCERY    LANE. 


INTRODUCTION. 

ISAAK  WALTON  —  whofe 
"Compleat  Angler,"  in  fimilar 
facfimile,  precedes  this — in  his 
pathetic  narrative  of  the  laft 
illnefs  and  gentle  end  of  George  Herbert, 
tells  the  ftory  of  the  delivery  to  good  Mr, 
Edmund  Duncon  of  that  manufcript  which 
proved  to  be  thofe  poems  that,  as  "The 
Temple,"  have  pafTed  "  for  all  time  "  into 
the  facred  verfe  of  England,  if  one  might 
not  even  fay  of  Chriftendom.  Biographi- 
cally  and  bibliographically,  it  is  important  to 
fix  the  exad:  date  of  its  "  fweet  finger's " 
death,  and  as  a  corollary  of  the  firft  edition 
of  "  The  Temple."  Confequently  this 
incident  falls  here  firft  of  all  to  be  given 
and  examined.  After  other  more  perfonal 
matters,  the  departing  faint,  fays  his  bio- 


vi  The  Temple. 

grapher,    "did,   with    fuch    a  humility   as 
feemed  to  exalt  him,  bow  down  to   Mr. 
Duncon,  and   with  a  thoughtful  and  con- 
tented look,  fay  to  him :  Sir,  I  pray  deliver 
this  little  book  to  my  dear  brother  Farrer 
[Nicholas  Ferrar],  and  tell  him  he  fhall  find 
in  it  a  pifture  of  the  many  fpiritual  conflidls 
that  have  paft  betwixt  God  and  my  foul 
before  I  could  fubjeft  mine  to  the  will  of 
Jefus  myMafter,in  Whofefervice  I  havenow 
found  perfed  freedom ;  defire  him  to  read 
it,  and  then,  if  he  can  think  it  may  turn  to 
the  advantage  of  any  dejefted  poor  foul,  let 
it  be  made  publick ;  if  not,  let  him  burn  it, 
for  I  and  it  are  lefs  than  the  leaft  of  God's 
mercies."     "Thus  meanly,"  adds  Walton, 
"  did  this  humble  man  think  of  this  excellent 
book,  which  now  bears  the  name  of  The 
Temple,  or  Sacred  Poems  and  Private  Ejacu- 
lations."    The  incident  and  interview  and  the 
fwift-following  death  have  ufually  been  af- 
figned  to  1 62  2,  becaufe  of  the  regifter's  entry 
of  the  burial,  but  they  really  belong  to  1 633. 
For  reafons  that  will  appear  immediately. 


IntroduSlion.  vii 

|i  the  entries  preceding  and  fucceeding,  and 
I  the  entry  of  Herbert's  own  burial,  are  here 
!  given  verbatim  et  literatim,  as  thus : — 

Ann  1633. 
Buried  was  the  widow  Smith  5  of  February 
William  Ellyott  the  younger  was  buried  viij  March 
Mr  George  Herbert  Efq'  Parfon  of  Fuggleftone 
and  Bemerton  buried  the  3"'  day  of 
March  1632 

Richard  Pirmmett  was  buried 
xxij  of  June 

An.  Dom. 
1634     Edith  Bacon  the  wife  of 
John  Bacon  was  buried  iiij  January 

163  + 

It  lies  on  the  furface  that  thefe  entries 
were  made  by  the  old  (illiterate)  fcribe  of 
Fuggleftone  and  Bemerton  irregularly,  as 
probably  fuited  his  memory  or  convenience. 
Though  apparently  he  ufed  to  reckon  as  a 
rule  from  January  to  January,  in  adding 
the  year  in  the  Herbert  entry,  he  Aid  into 
the  old  mode  of  reckoning  from  25  th 
March,  whereby  our  3rd  March,  1633, 
would  be  recorded  as  3rd  March,  1632.  It 
will  be  noticed  that  in  addition  to  this,  as 


viii  The  Temple. 

Edith  Bacon's  burial  belongs  to  1634,  the 
prefumption  would  have  been  that  Herbert's 
and  Pirmmett's  belonged  to  the  immediately- 
preceding  year,  i.^.  1633,  while  Herbert'sFOL- 
Lows  one  belonging  to  1633,  not  1632.  But 
befides  thefe  confiderations,  other  fadts  go  to 
prove  that  George  Herbert  was  living  long 
fubfequent  to  3rd  March,  1632,  as  —  1632, 
e.g.  his  well-known  Letter  to  Nicholas 
Ferrar  concerning  Valdesso  is  dated  29th 
September,  1632;  then,  the  Will  of  his  niece 
Dorothy  Vaughan  (daughter  of  his  fifter 
Margaret)  was  "proved"  by  him  as  exe- 
cutor in  the  Prerogative  Court  of  Canterbury 
on  9th  Odober,  1632*;  and  finally,  his  own 
Will  is  fhown  to  have  been  drawn  up  fubfe- 
quent to  his  niece's,  by  its  difpofing  of  100/, 
left  by  her  to  him.  Thus  3rd  March,  i  d^,'^, 
was  unqueftionably  the  real  date  of  Herbert's 
interment,  and  the  laft  of  February  or  ift  of 
March  his  probable  day  of  death.  It  follows 
that  not  to  1632  but  to  1633  belongs  the 

*  Herbert  was  fworn  by  commiffion  before  Nathaniel 
Boflock,  his  curate — the  '  commiffion '  being  explained 
by  his  fragile  health. 


IntroduSiion.  ix 


cc 


firft  impreffion"  of  "The  Temple."* 
Nicholas  Ferrar  appears  to  have  thrown 
off  a  few  gift  copies  of  the  "  little  book  "  for 
immediate  friends.     Thefe  are  without  date, 

AND  ONLY  A  SINGLE  EXEMPLAR  OF  THESE 
UNDATED    COPIES     IS    AT    PRESENT     KNOWN. 

From  that,  by  the  kindnefs  of  its  owner 
(Henry  Huth,  Efq.),  our  facfimile  has  been 
made.  But  with  the  flight  exception  of  the 
imprints  on  the  title-pages,  the  two  editions 
of  1633 — firft  and  fecond — are  identical  with 
the  undated  copy.  Doubtlefs  the  two  title- 
pages  of  thefe  two  editions  will  be  acceptable. 
They  are  as  follows : — 

*  The  Rev.  I.  Gregory  Smith,  M.  A.,  in  his  collefted 
Eflays  (from  "  The  Chriftian  Remembrancer,"  vol.  xliv. 
pp.  106-7)  '^ys :  '"The  Temple  '  was  firft  given  to  the 
world  in  1633,  by  Nicholas  Ferrar,  Herbert's  literary 
executor;  under  his  editorfhip  it  was  printed  by  his 
daughters  and  other  members  of  his  houfehold,  or  •  Pro- 
teftant  Nunnery/  as  it  has  been  called,  at  Little  Gidden, 
in  Northamptonfhire,  and  then  publiftied  at  Cambridge, 
after  being,  of  courfe,  formally  licenfed  by  the  Vice- 
Chancellor's  'imprimatur.'"  There  is  no  authority 
whatever  for  this  alleged  printing  privately  at  Little 
Gidding.  The  undated  and  dated  alike  are  expreffly 
ftated  to  be  "Printed  by  Thomas  Buck"  {m/upra). 


mm 


THE 

TEMPLE. 


SACRED  POEMS«3|?0' 

AND 
PRIVATE   EJA- 
CULATIONS, i^^ 

By  Mr.  George  Herbert. 


PSAL.    29. 

In  Ms  'Temple  doth  every 
man  fpeak  of  his  honour.  ^^ 


CAMBRIDGE: 

Printed  by  'Thorn.  Buck, 

and  Roger  IDaniel,  printers 
totheUniverfitie. 

1633- 


mmm^m 


TEMPLE 


SACRED  POEMS 

AND 

PRIVATE  EJACU- 
LATIONS. 


By  Mr.  George  Herbert, 

late  Oratour  of  the  Univerfitie 

of  Cambridge. 


The  fecond  Edition. 


PsAL.     29. 

In  his  Temple  doth  every  man 
/peak  of  his  honour. 


Printed  by  T.  Buck,zx\d  R.  ^Baniel, 
printers  to  the  Univerfitie 
of  Cambridge,-!  633.  1 


T    And  are  to  be  fold  by  Fr.  Green. 


m^. 


xii  The  Temple. 

Following  the  2nd  edition  of  1633 — which 
was  a  diftindt  book,  with  new  fetting  up  of 
types — came  the  3rd  in  1634,  4th  in  1635, 
5th  in  1638,  6th  in  1641,  7th  in  1656,  8th 
in  1660,  9th  in  1667,  loth  in  1674,  nth 
in  1679,  ^^*^^  '"  I7°3>  ^3*^  in  1709.  The 
text  from  the  ift  to  the  6th  edition  remained 
the  fame;  from  1640  "  The  Synagogue  "  of 
Christopher  Harvey  accompanied  "The 
Temple;"  from  1656  onward  there  were 
orthographical  alterations;  in  1660  was  "an 
alphabetical  table  for  ready  finding  out  chief 
places;"  in  the  Life  by  Walton,  1670,  firft 
appeared  a  portrait  of  Herbert;  in  1674, 
"  Temple,"  another  portrait,  and  two  (forry) 
illuftrations  to  "The  Church  Threfliold" 
and  "  The  Altar;"  in  1679  began  fuch  cor- 
ruptions of  the  text  as  "  gore  "  for  "  door  " 
in  The  Thankfgiving  (1.  6),  and  "  my  "  for 
"thy"  (1.  29) ;  and  fo  increafingly  onward. 

The  "  firft  impreffion,"  though  in  the  un- 
dated copies  fent  out  early  in  1633,  was  not 
committed  to  the  prefs  without  oppofition. 
Walton  informs  us  in  his  own  quaint  way 


IntroduSlion.  xiii 

of  fuch  oppofition :  "  This  ought  to  be  noted, 
that  when  Mr.  Farrer  fent  this  book  to  Cam- 
bridge to  be  licenfed  for  the  prefs,  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  would  by  no  means  allow  the 
two  fo  much-noted  verfes, 

'  Religion  (lands  a-tiptoe  in  our  land, 
Ready  to  pafs  to  the  American  ftrand,' 

("The  Church  Militant,"  II.  239-40.) 

to  be  printed,  and  Mr.  Farrer  would  by  no 
means  allow  the  book  to  be  printed  and  want 
them.  But  after  fome  time  and  fome  argu- 
ments for  and  againft  this  being  made  pub- 
lick,  the  Vice-Chancellor  faid,  '  I  knew  Mr. 
Herbert  well,  and  know  that  he  had  many 
heavenly  fpeculations,  and  was  a  divine  poet ; 
but  I  hope  the  world  will  not  take  him  to  be 
an  infpired  prophet,  and  therefore  I  licenfe 
the  whole  book.'  So  that  it  came  to  be 
printed  without  the  diminution  or  addition  of 
a  fyllable  fince  it  was  dehvered  into  the  hands 
of  Mr.  Duncon,  fave  only  that  Mr.  Farrer 
had  added  that  excellent  preface  that  is 
printed  before  it." 


xiv  The  Temple. 

The  manufcript  delivered  to  Mr.  Edmund 
DuNCON  has  difappeared,  but  two  import- 
ant MSS.  of  "  The  Temple"  are  extant.  The 
firft,  and  moft  valuable,  is  a  little  Gidding- 
bound  volume,  now  in  the  Williams  Library, 
London.  It  contains  about  one-half  of  "  The 
Temple,"  and  extremely  interefting  addi- 
tional Poems,  as  well  as  corredions  and  va- 
riations of  the  others  in  Herbert's  own  auto- 
graph. The  whole  of  thefe  were  firft  given 
to  the  world  by  me  in  my  Fuller  Worthies' 
Library  edition  of  the  complete  Works  in 
Verfe  and  Profe  of  George  Herbert ;  and  as 
I  write  this  the  Aldine  Edition  of  the  poems 
(George  Bell  and  Sons)  is  publifhed,  contain- 
ing the  fame.  Thither  the  curious  Reader  is 
referred.  The  other  MS.  is  in  The  Bodleian, 
andfeemstohave  been  thetranfcript  prefented 
to  the  Vice-Chancellor  for  his  "licenfe" — 
albeit  neither  in  the  undated  nor  dated  copy 
of  1633  or  onward,  does  any  "licenfe  "  ap- 
pear. It  may  be  noted  that  in  the  Williams 
MS.  volume  the  title  is  not  "  The  Temple," 
but  more  fimply   and    Chriftianly    "  The 


IntroduSllon.  XV 

Church  "—that  of  "  The.  Temple  "  having 
been  beftowed  by  Ferrar,  who  fetched  it  from 
Pfalm  xxix. — "  In  his  Temple  doth  every 
man  fpeak  of  his  honour," — which  was  the 
original  motto  on  the  title-page. 

The  little  volume  now  reproduced  in  ab- 
folute  fac-fimlle  in  every  way — viz.,  in  type, 
paper,  binding — apart  from  its  own  intrinfic 
precioufnefs,  in  its  own  humble  but  moft 
genuine  kind,  holds  a  memorable  place  in 
our  literary  biography.  The  greater  Henry 
Vaughan  earlier,  and  William  Cowper 
later,  regarded  their  meeting  with  "  The 
Temple  "  as  a  profoundly  formative  element 
in  their  inner  life.  Still  earlier  it  was  one  of 
the  fcanty  library  of  Charles  I.  in  his  impri- 
fonment,  and  the  royal  copy  revealed  "  much 
reading"  of  it.  But  its  crowning  glory  is 
to  have  drawn  from  Richard  Crashaw  the 
peerlefs  tribute  of  naming  his  own  Poems 
"  Steps  to  the  Temple,"  and  his  delightful 
lines,  with  which  this  little  Introdudtion  may 
moft  fitly  clofe : — 


xvi  The  Temple. 

On  Mr.  George  Herbert'i  Booh  intituled  The  Temple 
of  Sacred  Poems  :  fent  to  a  Gentle-  Woman. 

Know  you,  faire,  on  what  you  looke  ? 

Divineft  love  lyes  in  this  booke  : 

Expedling  fier  from  your  faire  eyes, 

To  kindle  this  his  facrifice. 

When  your  hands  untie  thefe  firings, 

Thinke  yo'  have  an  angell  by  the  wings ; 

One  that  gladly  would  be  nigh. 

To  waite  upon  each  morning  figh ; 

To  flutter  in  the  balmy  aire 

Of  your  well-perfumed  praier; 

Thefe  white  plumes  of  his  hee'I  lend  you. 

Which  every  day  to  Heaven  will  fend  you: 

To  take  acquaintance  of  each  fpheare. 

And  all  your  fmooth-fac'd  kindred  there. 

And  though  Herbert's  name  doe  owe 

Thefe  devotions ;  faireft,  know 

While  I  thus  Jay  them  on  the  flirine 

Of  your  white  hand,  they  are  mine. 

Alexander  B.  Grosart 

St.  George's  Vestry, 

Blackburn,  Lancashire, 
April,  1876. 


m 


THE 

TEMPLE 

SACRED  POEMS 

AND 
PRIVATE   EJA- 
CULATIONS. 


By  Mr.  Gkorce  Herbbrt. 

late  Oratour  of  the  Univerfitie 

of  Cambridgt. 

PsAL.    29. 

In  his  Temple  doth  every] 
man/peak  of  his  honour.  J 


<€» 


CAMBRIDGE: 

Printed  by  Thomas  Buck 

and  Rogtr  lianiel: 

%  And  are  to  be  foldby  Francis 

Green,  ilationer  in. 

CambriJge, 


l»! 


IS 


f  The  Dedication. 


LOrd,  my  firjl  fruits  pnfent  tbemfelves  ti  thee; 
Yet  not  mine  neither:  for  from  thee  they  came. 
And  mu/i  return.  Accept  of  then  and  me. 
And  make  us  ftrive,toho  Jhallfing  befi  thy  name. 
Turn  their  eyes  hither,  who  Jhall make  again: 
Theirs,  who  Jhall  hurt  themfelvcor  me.refrain. 


The  Printers  to  the  Reader. 


i  He  dedication  of  this  work  having  be«B 
made  by  the  Authour  to  the  'Divine  Ma- 
1  jejiie  onely,how  ihould  we  now  prefumc 
tointercA  any  mortall  man  in  the  patro- 
nage of  it?  Much  leSe  think  we  it  meet 
to  feek  the  recommendation  of  the  Mufes  ,  for  that 
which  himfelf  was  confident  to  have  been  infpired  by 
a  diviner  breath  then  flows  from  HiiUon.  The  world 
therefore  Ihall  receive  it  in  that  naked  fimplicitie,  with 
which  he  left  ii.without  any  addition  either  of  fupport 
or  ornament,  more  then  is  included  in  it  felf.  We  leave 
it  free  and  unforellalled  to  every  mans  judgement,  and 
to  the  benefit  that  he  fhall  finde  by  perufall.  Onely  for 
the  clearing  of  fome  pafTages,  we  have  thought  it  not 
unfit  to  make  the  common  Reader  privie  to  fome  few 
particularities  of  the  condition  and  difpofition  of  the 
Perfon; 

Being  nobly  bom,  and  as  eminently  endued  with 
gifts  of  the  minde,  and  having  by  induftrie  and  happy 
education  pcrfefted  them  to  that  great  height  of  e«cel- 
lencie.whereof  his  fellowfhip  of  Trinitie  CoUedge  in 
Cambridge ,  and  his  Orator-fhip  in  the  Univerfitie, 
together  with  that  knowledge  which  the  Kings  Court 
had  taken  of  him,  could  make  relation  farre  above  or- 
dinarie.  Quitting  both  his  deferts  and  all  the  opportu- 
nities that  he  had  for  worldly  preferment,  he  betook 
himfelf  to  the  Sandluarie  and  Temple  of  God,  choo- 
fiog  rather  to  ferve  at  Gods  Altar,  then  to  feek  the  ho- 

T  2  nour 


Bour  of  State-employments.  Aa  for  thofe  inward  en- 
forcements to  this  courfe  (for  outward  there  was  none) 
wfiich  many  of  thefe  enfuing  verfes  bear  witnefleof, 
they  detradl  not  from  the  freedome  ,  but  adde  to  the 
honour  of  this  refolution  in  him.  As  God  had  enabled 
him,  fo  he  accounted  him  meet  not  onely  to  be  called, 
but  to  be  compelled  to  this  fervice:  Wherein  his  faith- 
full  difcharge  was  fuch.as  may  make  him  juftly  a  com- 
panion to  the  primitive  Saints,  and  a  pattern  or  more 
for  the  age  he  lived  in. 

To  tellifie  his  independencie  upon  all  others,  and 
to  quicken  his  diligence  in  this  kinde,heufed  in  his  or- 
dinarie  fpeech,  when  he  made  mention  of  the  bleffed 
name  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jefus  Chrift,  to  adde, 
My  Majler. 

Next  God,  he  loved  that  which  God  himfelf  hath 
magnified  above  all  things,  that  is,  his  Word  :  fo  as  he 
hath  been  heard  to  make  folemne  proteftation,  that  he 
would  not  part  with  one  leaf  thereof  for  the  whole 
livorld,  if  it  were  offered  him  in  exchange. 

His  obedience  and  conformitie  to  the  Church  and 
the  difcipline  thereof  was  Angularly  remarkable. 
Though  he  abounded  in  private  devotions,  yet  went 
he  every  morning  and  evening  with  his  familie  to  the 
Church;and  by  his  example, exhortations,  and  encou- 
ragements drew  the  greater  part  of  his  parifhioners  to 
accompanie  him  dayly  in  the  publick  celebration  of 
Divine  Service. 

As  for  worldly  matter8,hisIove  and  efteem  to  them 
was  fo  little ,  as  no  man  can  more  ambitioufly  feelc, 
then  he  did  earneftly  endeavour  the  refignation  of  an 
Ecclefiafticall  dignitie,which  he  was  poffeffour  of  But 
God  permitted  not  the  accomplifhment  of  this  defire, 
having  ordained  him  his  inftrumentfor  reedifying  of 
the  Church  belonging  thereunto,  that  had  layen  rui- 
nated almoft  twenty  yeares.  The  reparation  whereof, 

having 


having  been  unefFcftually  attempted  by  publick  coi- 
ledions ,  was  in  the  end  by  his  own  and  fomc  few 
others  private  free-will-ofFerings  fuccesfulJy  effefted. 
With  the  remembrance  whereof,  as  of  an  efpeciall 
good  work,  when  a  friend  went  about  to  comfort  him 
on  hb  death-bed,  he  made  anfwer,  //  is  a  good  work , 
if  it  he  JprinUed  with  the  bloudofChrift:  other  wife 
then  in  this  refpcft  he  could  finde  nothing  to  glorie  or 
comfort  himfelf  with.neither  in  this,nor  in  any  other 
thing. 

And  thefe  are  but  a  few  of  many  that  might  be  faid, 
which  we  have  chofen  to  premife  as  a  glance  to  fomc 
parts  of  the  enfuing  book,  and  for  an  example  to  the 
Reader.  We  conclude  all  with  his  own  Motto,  with 
which  heufed  to  conclude  all  things  that  might  fecra 
to  tend  any  way  to  his  own  honour; 

Lejfe  then  tbeleaft  of  Gods  mercies. 


The  Church-porch. 

Perirrhanterium . 

^  Hou,  whofe  fweet  youth  and  early  hopes  in- 
hance 
Thy  rate  and  price  ,  and  mark  thee  for  a 
treafure; 

Hearken  unto  a  Verfcr ,  who  may  chance 
Ryme  thee  to  good,  and  make  a  bait  of  pleafure. 
A.verfe  may  finde  him,  who  afermon  flies. 
And  turn  delight  into  afacrifice. 

Beware  of  lull:  it  doth  pollute  and  foul 

Whom  God  m  Baptifme  walht  with  his  own  blood. 

It  blots  thy  lelTon  written  inthyfoulj 

The  holy  lines  cannot  be  underftood. 
How  dare  thofe  eyes  upon  a  Bible  look, 
Mufrhlcflc  towardsGod,whofe  luft  is  all  their  book: 

Abftain  whoUy.or  wed.  Thy  bounteous  Lord 

Allows  thee  choife  of  paths:  take  no  by-wayes; 

Bat  gladly  welcome  what  he  doth  aiFord; 

Not  grudgingjthat  thy  luft  hath  bounds  and  ftaies. 
Continence  hath  his  joy:  weigh  both;  and  ftill 
If  rottennefle  have  more,  let  Heaven  go. 

If  God  had  laid  all  common,  certainly 

Man  would  have  been  th'inclofcr :  but  fmce  now 

God  hath  impal'd  us,  on  the  contraric 

Man  breaks  the  fence,and  every  ground  will  plough. 

O  what  were  man,  might  he  himfclf  mifplace! 

Sure  to  be  erode  he  would  fliift  feet  and  face. 

A  Drink 


2  The  Church-porch. 

Drink  not  the  third  glaflc,  which  thou  canft  not  tame, 
When  once  it  is  within  thee;  but  before 
Mayfl.  rule  it,as  thou  lift;  and  poure  the  fhatne. 
Which  it  would  poure  on  thee,  upon  the  floorc. 
Itismoftjufttothrow  that  on  the  ground. 
Which  would  throw  me  there,  if  I  keep  the  round. 

He  that  is  drunken,  may  his  mother  kill 
Biggewith  his  fifter:  he  hath  loft  the  reins, 
Ii  outlawd  by  himfelf :  all  kinde  of  ill 
Did  with  his  liquourfiide  into  his  veins. 
The  drunkard  forfets  Man,and  doth  deveft 
All  worldly  right,fave  what  he  hath  by  beaft. 

Shall  I,to  pleafcanotherswine-fprungminde, 
Lofe  all  mine  own?  God  hath  giv'n  me  a  meafure 
Short  of  his  canne.and  bodie;  muft  I  finde 
A  pain  in  that.wherein  he  findes  a  pleafure? 
Stay  at  the  third  glafle:if  thou  lofe  thy  hold. 
Then  thou  art  modeft,and  the  wine  grows  bold. 

If  rcafon  move  not  Gallants ,  quit  the  room, 
(All  in  a  Ihipwrack  (hift  their  feverall  way) 
Let  not  a  common  ruine  thee  intombe : 
Be  not  a  beaft  in  courtefie  j  but  ftay. 

Stay  at  the  third  cup,or  forgo  the  place. 

Wine  above  all  things  doth  Gods  ftamp  deface. 

Yet,  if  thou  finne  in  wine  or  wantonnefle, 

Boaft  not  thereof;  nor  make  thy  Ihame  thy  glorie. 

Frail  tie  gets  pardon  by  fubmifsivenefle ; 

But  he  that  boafts,  (huts  that  out  of  his  ttorie. 
He  makes  flat  warre  with  God.and  doth  defie 
With  his  poore  clod  of  earth  the  fpaciout  iky. 

Take 


The  Church-porcb.  q 

Take  not  his  naiuc,  who  made  thy  mouth.in  vaio; 
It  get!  thee  nothing,and  hath  noexcufc. 
Lull  and  wine  plead  a  pleafure,avarice  gain: 
But  the  cheap  fwearer  through  his  open  fluce 

Lets  his  foul  runnc  for  nought,  as  little  fearing. 

Were  I  an  Epicure,!  could  bate  fwearing. 

When  thou  doft  tell  anothers  jeft.therein 
Omit  the  oathes,  which  true  wit  cannot  need: 
Pick  out  of  tales  the  mirth,  but  not  the  finne. 
He  pares  his  apple,  that  will  cleanly  feed. 

Play  not  away  the  vertue  of  that  name,      (tame. 

Which  is  thy  bcft  ftake ,  when  griefs  make  thee 

Thccheapeftfinnes  moftdearely  punilhtare  ; 

Bccaufe  to  (hun  them  alfo  is  fo  cheap: 

For  we  have  wit  to  mark  them,  and  to  fpare. 

O  crumble  not  away  thy  fouls  fair  heap. 
If  thou  wilt  die.the  gates  of  hell  are  broad: 
Pride  and  full  linnes  have  made  the  way  a  road. 

Lie  not;  but  let  thy  heart  be  true  to  God, 
Thy  mouth  to  it,  thy  aftions  to  them  both: 
Cowards  tell  lies,  and  thofc  that  fear  the  rod; 
The  ftormie  working  foul  fpits  lies  and  froth. 
Dare  to  be  true.  Nothing  can  need  a  ly: 
A  fault,  which  need*  itmoft.grows  two  thercb). 

Flie  idlenefle,  which  yet  thoucanft  notflie 

By  dreffing,miftreffing,  and  complement. 

If  thofe  take  up  thy  day,  the  funne  will  crie 

Againft  thee :  for  his  light  was  onely  lent.  (thers 

God  gave  thy  foul  brave  wings ;  put  not  thofc  fea- 
Into  a  bed,  to  fleep  out  all  ill  weathers. 

A   «  Alt 


4  The  Church-porch. 

Art  thou  a  Magiftratc?then  be  fevere: 
If  ftudious;  copie  fair,what  time  hath  biurr'd; 
Redeem  truth  fromhisjawes:  if  fouldier. 
Chafe  brave  employments  with  a  naiced  fword 
Throughout  the  world.  Fool  not:  for  all  may  have. 
If  they  dare  try,  a  glorious  life.or  grave. 

O  England!  full  of  finne.but  moft  of  floth; 

Spit  out  thy  flegme,and  fill  thy  breft  with  gloric; 

Thy  Gentrie  bleats,  as  if  thy  native  cloth 

Transfus'd  a  fheepifhnelTe  into  thy  ftorie: 
Not  that  they  all  are  fo;  but  that  the  moft 
Are  gone  to  graffe,  and  in  the  pafturc  loft. 

This  lofle  fprings  chiefly  from  our  education. 
Some  till  their  ground,butlet  weeds  choke  theirfonnc: 
Some  mark  a  partridge,  never  their  childes  fafliion 
Some  (hip  them  over,  and  the  thing  is  done. 

Studie  this  art,make  it  thy  great  defigne; 

And  if  Gods  image  move  thee  not,let  thine. 

Some  great  eftates  provide,  but  doe  not  breed 

A  maft'ring  minde ;  fo  both  are  loft  thereby; 

Or  els  they  breed  them  tender,  make  them  need 

All  that  they  leave :  this  is  flat  povertie. 

For  he.tbat  needs  five  thoufand  pound  to  live, 
Is  full  as  poore  as  he.that  needs  but  five. 

The  way  to  make  thy  fonne  rich.is  to  fill 
His  minde  with  reft,  before  his  trunk  with  riches: 
For  wealth  without  contentment,  climbes  a  hill 
To  feel  thofe  tempefts,  which  fly  over  ditches. 
But  if  thy  fonne  can  make  ten  pound  his  meafure. 
Then  all  thou  addeft  may  be  call'd  his  trcafure. 

When 


The  Church-porch,  5 

When  thou  doft  purpofe  ought,  (within  thy  power) 
Be  fure  to  doe  it,  though  it  be  but  fmall: 
Conftancie  knits  the  bones,and  makes  us  ftowre, 
When  wanton  pleafures  becken  us  to  thrall. 
Who  breaks  his  own  bond,  forfeiteth  himfelf: 
What  nature  made  a  fhip,  he  makes  a  fhelf. 

Doe  all  things  like  a  man,  not  fneakingly: 

Think  the  king  fees  thee  ilill ;  for  his  King  does. 

Simpring  is  but  a  lay-hypocrifie: 

Give  it  a  corner,and  the  clue  undoes. 
Who  fears  to  do  ill,  fets  himfelf  to  task: 
Who  fears  to  do  well,fure  fliould  wear  a  mask. 

Look  to  thy  mouth;  difeafes  enter  there. 
Thou  haft  two  fconfes,if  thy  ftomack  call; 
Carve,or  difcourfe;  do  not  afamine  fear. 
Whocarves,is  kind  to  two;  who  talks,  to  all. 

Look  on  meat,think  it  dirt,then  eata  bit; 

And  fay  withall.  Earth  to  earth  I  commit. 

Slight  thofe  who  fay amidft  their  fickly  healths, 
Thou  liv'ft  by  rule.  What  doth  not  fo,  butman? 
Houfcs  are  built  by  rule,  and  common-wealths. 
Entice  the  truftyfunne,  if  that  you  can. 

From  his  Ecliptick  line:  becken  the  skie. 

Who  lives  by  rule  then,  keeps  good  companie. 

Who  keeps  no  guard  upon  himfelf,  is  flack. 
And  rots  to  nothing  at  the  next  great  thaw. 
Man  is  a  {hop  of  rules,  a  well  trufs'd  pack, 
Whofe  every  parcell  under-writes  a  law. 
Lofe  not  thy  felf ,  nor  give  thy  humours  way: 
God  gave  them  to  thee  under  lockand  key. 

A  3  By 


6  The  Church-porch. 

By  all  means  ufe  fometimes  to  be  alone. 

Salute  thy  felf :  fee  what  thy  foul  doth  wear. 

Dare  tolook  in  thy  che(l;for'tis  thine  own: 

And  tumble  up  and  down  what  thou  find'ft  there. 
Who  cannot  reft  till  hec  good  fellows  finde, 
He  breaks  up  houfe,turns  out  of  doores  his  minik 

Be  thriftie,  but  not  covetous :  therefore  give 

Thy  need, thine  honour,and  thy  friend  his  due. 

Never  was  fcraper  brave  man.  Get  to  live; 

Then  live.and  ufe  it:  els,itis  not  true 
That  thou  haft  gotten.  Surely  ufe  alone 
Makes  money  not  a  contemptible  ftone. 

Never  exceed  thy  income.  Youth  may  make 
Ev'n  with  the  yeare  :  but  age,  if  it  will  hit, 
Shoots  a  bow  fhort.and  leffens  ftill  his  ftake, 
Ai  the  day  leffens,  and  his  life  with  it. 

Thy  children, kindred.friends  upon  thee  call; 

Before  thy  journey  fairly  part  with  all. 

Yet  in  thy  thriving  ftill  mifdoubt  fome  evil; 

Left  gaining  gain  on  thee,and  make  thee  dimme 

To  all  things  els.  Wealth  is  the  conjurers  devil; 

Whom  when  he  thinks  he  hath,  the  devil  hath  hin. 
Gold  thou  mayft  fafely  touch;  but  if  it  ftick 
Unto  thy  hands,  it  woundeth  to  the  quick. 

What  skills  it,  if  a  bag  of  ftones  or  gold 
About  thy  neck  do  drown  thee?  raife  thy  head; 
Take  ftarres  for  money;  ftarres  not  to  be  told 
Bf  any  art,  yet  to  be  purchafed. 

None  is  fo  waftefuU  as  the  fcrapingdame. 

She  lofeth  three  far  one;  her  foul,relt,fame. 


Br 


T^be  Church-porch .  7 

B7  BO  means  runne  in  debt :  take  thine  own  meafure. 
Who  cannot  live  on  twentie  pound  a  yeare, 
Cannot  on  fourtie :  he's  a  man  of  pleafure, 
A  kinde  of  thing  that's  for  it  felf  too  deere. 
The  curious  unthrift  malces  his  cloth  too  wide. 
And  fparcs  himfelf ,  but  would  his  taylor  chide. 

Spend  not  on  hopes.They  that  by  pleading  clothes 
Do  fortunes  fceic,  when  worth  and  lervicc  fail. 
Would  have  their  tale  beleeved  for  their  oathes, 
And  are  like  empty  vellels  under  fail. 

Old  courtiers  know  this ;  therefore  let  out  {o. 
As  all  the  day  thou  mayft  hold  out  to  go. 

In  clothes,  cheap  handfomnefle  doth  bear  the  bell. 

Wifcdome's  a  trimmer  thing,  then  Ihope're  gave. 

S«y  not  then,  This  with  that  lace  will  do  well; 

But,This  with  my  difcretion  will  be  brave. 
Much  curioufnefle  is  a  perpetuall  wooing 
Nothing  with  labour;  folly  long  a  doing. 

Plajr  not  for  gain,  but  fport.  Who  playes  for  more, 
Then  he  can  lofe  with  pleafure,  (lakes  his  heart ; 
Perhaps  his  wives  too,and  whom  Ihe  hath  bore: 
Servants  and  churches  alfo  play  their  part. 
Onely  a  herauld.who  that  way  doth  pafle, 
Findcs  hiscrackt  nameatlengthinthcchurch-glanc 

If  yet  thou  love  game  at  fo  deere  a  rate. 
Learn  this,  that  hath  old  gamefters  deerely  coft: 
Doft  lofe?  rife  up:doft  winne?  rife  in  that  ftate. 
Who  drive  to  fit  out  lofing  hands,arc  loft. 
Game  is  a  civil  gunpowder,  in  peace 
Blowing  up  houfes  with  their  whole  increafe. 

A  4  In 


8  The  Church-porch. 

Id  converfation  boldnefle  now  bears  fvvay. 
But  know,  that  nothing  can  fo  foolilh  be. 
As  empty  boldnefle:  therefore  firft  aflay 
To  ftuffe  thy  minde  with  folid  braverie; 

Then  march  on  gallant:  get  fubftantiall  worth. 

Boldnefle  guilds  finely,  and  will  fet  it  forth. 

Be  fweet  to  all.  Is  thy  complexion  fowre? 

Then  keep  fuch  companie ;  make  them  thy  allay: 

Get  a  fliarp  wife.a  fervant  that  will  lowre. 

A  Humbler  ftumbles  leaft  in  rugged  way. 

Command  thy  felf  in  chief  He  lifes  warre  kncwi. 
Whom  all  his  paflionsfollow,as  he  goes. 

Catch  not  at  quarrels.  He  thatdares  not  fpeak 
Plainly  and  home,  is  coward  of  the  two. 
Think  not  thy  fame  at  ev'ry  twitch  will  break : 
By  great  deeds  fliew,  that  thou  canft  little  do; 

And  do  them  not;  that  fhall  thy  wifdome  be; 

And  change  thy  temperance  into  braverie. 

If  that  thy  fame  with  ev'ry  toy  be  pos'd, 
'Tis  a  thinne  webbe, which  poyfonous  fancies  make: 
But  the  great  fouldiers  honour  was  compos'd 
Of  thicker  (luiFe,which  would  endure  a  fliake. 

Wifdome  picks  friends;  civilitie  playes  the  reft. 

A  toy  ftiunn'd  cleanly  pafleth  with  the  bcft. 

Laugh  not  too  much:  the  wittie  man  laughs  leaft: 

For  wit  is  newes  onely  to  ignorance. 

Lefle  at  thine  own  things  laugh;  left  in  the  jeft 

Thy  perfon  fhare,and  the  conceit  advance. 
Make  not  thy  fport.abufes :  for  the  fly 
That  feeds  on  dung,  is  coloured  thereby. 

Pick 


The  Cburcb-porcb.  9 

Pick  out  of  mirth,  like  ftones  out  of  thy  ground, 
Profanenefle.  filthineffe,  abufivenefie. 

Thefe are  the  fcumme.withwhichcourfewits  abound: 
The  fine  may  fpare  thefe  well,  yet  not  go  leffe. 
All  things  are  bigge  with  jeft:  nothing  that's  plain. 
But  may  be  wittie,  if  thou  haft  the  vein. 

Wit's  an  unruly  engine,  wildly  ftriking 
Sometimes  a  friend,  fometimes  the  engineer. 
Haft  thou  the  knack?  pamper  it  not  with  liking: 
But  if  thou  want  it,  buy  it  not  too  deere. 
Many  afFefting  wit  beyond  their  power. 
Have  got  to  be  a  deare  fool  for  an  houre. 

A  fad  wife  valour  is  the  brave  complexion. 
That  leads  the  van,  and  fwallows  up  the  cities. 
The  gigler  is  a  milk-maid ,  whom  infeftion. 
Or  a  fir'd  beacon  frighteth  from  his  ditties. 

Then  he's  thefport:  the  mirth  then  in  himrefts, 

And  the  fad  man  is  cock  of  all  his  jefts. 

Towards  great  perfons  ufe  refpeaive  boldnefle : 
That  temper  gives  them  theirs,  and  yet  doth  take 
Nothing  from  thine:  in  fervice,care,or  coJdneffe 
Doth  ratably  thy  fortunes  raarreor  make. 
Feed  no  man  in  his  finnes :  for  adulation 
Doth  make  thee  parcell-devil  in  damnation. 

En  vie  not  greatneffe:  for  thou  mak'st  thereby 
Thy  felf  the  worfe,  and  fo  the  diftance  greater. 
Be  not  thine  own  worm :  yet  fuch  jealoufie. 
As  hurts  not  others,  but  may  make  thee  better, 

Is  a  good  fpurre.  Correft  thy  paffions  fpite ; 

Then  may  the  beafts  draw  thee  to  happy  light. 

A  S  When 


lo  T^be  Church-porch. 

When  bafenefle  is  exalted,  do  not  bate 
The  place  iu  honour, for  the  perfons  fake. 
The/hrine  is  that  which  thou  doft  venerate; 
And  not  the  bcaft,that  bears  icon  his  back. 

1  care  not  though  the  cloth  of  ftate  fhould  be 

Not  of  rich  arras,  but  mean  tapeftrie. 

Thy  friend  put  in  thy  bofomc :  wear  his  eies 
Still  in  thy  heart,  that  he  may  fee  what's  there. 
If  caufe  require,  thou  art  his  facrifice  j 
Thy  drops  of  bloud  rauft  pay  down  all  his  fear : 
But  love  is  loft;  the  way  of  friendfhip's  gone. 
Though  David\i^  his  Jonatban,Cbrijih\%  Jc 

Vet  be  not  furety,  if  thou  be  a  father. 

Love  is  a  perfonall  debt.  I  cannot  give 

My  childrens  right,  nor  ought  he  take  it:  rather 

Both  friends  ftiould  die,then  hinder  them  to  live. 

Fathers  firft  enter  bonds  to  natures  ends; 

And  are  her  furetie5,cre  they  are  a  friends. 

If  thou  be  fingle,  all  thy  goods  and  ground 
Submit  to  love ;  but  yet  not  more  then  all. 
Give  one  eftate,  as  one  life.  None  is  bound 
To  work  for  two.who  brought  himfelf  to  thrall. 
God  made  me  one  man;  love  makes  me  no  more. 
Till  labour  come,  aad  make  my  weakncfiefcore- 

I»  thy  difcourfe,  if  thou  defire  to  pleafc : 
All  fuch  it  courteous.ufefull,  new,  or  wittic. 
UfefiJnefle  comes  by  labour,  wit  by  cafe ; 
Courtefie  grows  in  court ;  news  in  the  citie. 

Getagood  ftockofthefe,  then  draw  the  card; 

That  fuites  him  beft,  of  wliom  thy  fpeech  is  heard. 

Entice 


The  Cburb-porcb.  1 1 

Entice  all  neatly  to  what  they  know  beft; 

For  fo  thou  doft  thy  fclf  and  him  a  pleafurt: 

(But  a  proud  ignorance  will  lole  his  reft, 

Rather  then  fliew  his  cards)  fteal  from  his  treafure 
What  to  ask  further.  Doubts  well  rais'd  do  lock 
The  fpcaker  to  thee,  and  preferve  thy  ftock. 

U  thou  be  Maftcr-gunner,  fpend  not  all 
That  thou canftfpeak,at  once;  but  husband  it. 
And  give  men  turns  of  fpeech :  do  not  foreftali 
By  lavifhneffe  thine  own.and  others  wit, 
Asifthoumad'ft  thy  will.  A  civil  gueft 
Will  no  more  talk  all.then  eat  all  the  feaft. 

Becalm  in  arguing:  for fiercenefle makes 

Erroura  fault,  and  truth  difcourtefie. 

Why  fhouid  I  feel  another  mans  millakes 

More,  then  his  ficknefles  or  povertie  ? 
In  love  I  ftiould :  but  anger  is  not  love, 
Norwifdome  neither:  therefore  gently  move. 

CalmnefTeis  great  ad  vantage:  he  that  lets 
Another  chafe,  may  warm  him  at  his  fire : 
Mark  all  his  wandrings.and  enjoy  his  frets; 
As  cunning  fencers  fuffer  heat  to  tire. 

Truth  dwels  not  in  the  cIouds:the  bow  that's  there. 
Doth  often  aim  at,  never  hit  the  fphere. 

Mark  what  another  fayes:  for  many  are 
Full  of  themfclves,  and  anfwer  their  own  notion. 
Take  all  into  thee;then  with  equall  care 
Baiiance  each  dram  me  of  reafon,  like  a  potion . 
If  truth  be  with  thy  friend,be  with  them  both: 
Share  in  the  con(^ueft,and  confeiTe  a  troth. 

Be 


1 2  The  Church  -porch. 

Be  ufefull  where  thou  liveft,  that  they  may 
Both  want.and  wifh  thy  pleating  prefcnce  ftill. 
Kindneffe,good  parts,great  places  are  the  way 
To  compaffe  this.  Finde  out  mens  wants  and  will, 
And  meet  them  there.  All  worldly  joyes  golcflc 
To  the  one  joy  of  doing  kindnefles. 

Pitch  thy  behaviour  low.thy  projefts  high ; 
So  {halt  thou  humble  and  magnanimous  be : 
Sink  not  infpirit:  whoaimcthat  the  sky, 
Shoots  higher  much  then  he  that  means  a  tree. 
A  grain  of  glorie  mixt  with  humblenefle 
Cures  both  a  fever  and  iethargickneiTe. 

Let  thy  minde  ftill  be  bent,ftill  plotting  where. 
And  when,and  how  the  bufinefle  may  be  done. 
Siacknefle  breeds  worms;  but  the  fure  traveller. 
Though  he  alight  fometimes,  ftill  goeth  on. 

Aftive  and  ftirring  fpirits  live  alone. 

Write  on  the  others,  Here  lies  fuch  a  one. 

Slight  not  the  fmalleft  loffe,  whether  it  be 
In  love  or  honour :  take  account  of  all ; 
Shine  like  the  funne  in  every  corner;  fee 
Whether  thy  ftock  of  credit  fwell,  or  fall. 

Who  fay, I  care  not,  thofe  Igive  for  loft; 

And  to  inftruft  them,  'twill  not  quit  the  coft. 

Scorn  no  mans  love.though  of  a  mean  degree ; 

(Love  is  a  prefent  foramightie  king) 

Much  lefle  make  any  one  thine  enemie. 

As  gunnes  deftroy,  fo  may  a  little  fling. 
The  cunning  workman  never  doth  refufe 
The  meaneft  tool.that  he  may  chance  to  ufe. 


All 


The  Cburcb-porcb.  13 

All  forrain  wifdome  doth  amount  to  this. 
To  take  all  that  is  given;  whether  wealth. 
Or  love,  or  language;  nothing  comes  amiffc : 
A  good  digeftion  turneth  all  to  health: 
And  then  as  farre  as  fair  behaviour  may, 
Strike  oiFallfcores;  none  are  fo  cleare  as  they. 

Keep  all  thy  native  good,  and  naturalize 

All  forrain  of  that  name;  but  fcorn  their  ill: 

Embrace  their  aftivenefTe,  not  vanities. 

Who  follows  all  things,  forfeiteth  his  will. 
If  thou  obferveft  ftrangers  in  each  fit, 
In  time  they'l  runne  thee  out  of  all  thy  wit. 

Affeft  in  things  about  thee  cleanlinefle. 
That  all  may  gladly  board  thee,  as  a  flowre. 
Slovens  take  up  their  flock  of  noifomneffe 
Beforehand  ,  and  anticipate  their  laft  houre. 
Let  thy  mindes  fwectnefle  have  his  operation 
Upon  thy  body,  clothes,  and  habitation. 

In  Almes  regard  thy  means,  and  others  merit. 

Think  heav'n  a  better  bargain,  then  to  give 

Oncly  thy  fingie  market-money  for  it. 

Joyn  bands  with  God  to  make  a  man  to  live. 
Give  to  all  fomething;  to  a  good  poore  man. 
Till  thou  change  names.and  be  where  he  began. 

Man  isGodsimage;  but  a  poore  man  is 
Chrifts  ftamp  to  boot:  both  images  regard. 
God  reckons  for  him,  counts  the  favour  his: 
Write,  So  much  giv 'n  to  God ;  thou  flialt  be  heard. 
Let  thy  almes  go  before,  and  keep  heav'ns  gate 
Open  for  thee ;  or  both  may  come  too  late. 
^  Reftore 


14  ^be  Cburcb-porcb. 

Reftore  to  God  his  due  in  tithe  and  time: 
A  tithe  purloin'd  cankers  the  whole eftate. 
Sundaies  obferve:  think  when  the  bells  do  chime, 
'Tis  angels  mufick;  therefore  come  not  late. 
God  then  deals  bleffings :  If  a  king  did  fo. 
Who  would  not  halle,  nay  give,  to  fee  the  fbow  ? 

Twice  on  the  day  his  due  is  upderftood ; 
For  all  the  week  thy  food  fo  oft  he  gave  thee. 
Thy  cheere  is  mended;  bate  not  of  the  food, 
Becaufe  'tis  better,  and  perhaps  may  fave  thee. 

Thwart  not  th'  Almighty  God:  O  be  not  croflc. 

Faft  when  thou  wilt;  but  then  'tis  gain,  not  loffe. 

Though  private  prayer  be  a  brave  deHgne, 
Yet  publick  hath  more  promifes,  more  love : 
And  love's  a  weight  to  hearts,  to  eies  a  figne. 
We  all  are  but  cold  fuitours;  let  us  move 

Where  it  is  warmed.  Leave  thy  fix  and  feven; 

Pray  with  themoft:  for  where  moft  pray,  is  heaven. 

When  once  thy  foot  enters  the  church,  be  bare. 
God  is  more  there,  then  thou:  for  thou  art  there 
Onely  by  his  permiffion.  Then  beware. 
And  make  thy  felf  all  reverence  and  fear. 

Kneeling  ne're  fpoil'd  fiik  flocking:  quit  thy  date. 

AUequall  are  within  the  churches  gate. 

Refort  to  fermons,  but  to  prayers  moil: 
Praying 's  the  end  of  preaching.  Obedreft; 
Stay  not  for  th*  other  pin:  why  thou  haft  loft 
A  joy  for  it  worth  worlds.  Thus  hell  doth  jeft 
Away  thy  blefliugs,  and  extrcamly  flout  thee, 
Thy  clothes  beingfaft,bui  thyfoul  loofeabout  thee. 

In 


1^ 


T^be  Cburcb-porcb.  15 

In  time  of  fervice  feal  up  both  thine  eie«. 
And  fend  them  to  thine  heart;  thatfpyingfinne. 
They  may  weep  out  the  ftains  by  them  did  rife : 
Thofc  doore*  being  (hut,  all  by  the  eare  comes  in. 

Who  marks  in  church-time  others  fymmetrie. 

Makes  all  their  beautie  his  deformitie. 


Let  vain  or  bufie  thoughts  have  there  no  part: 
Bring  not  thy  plough,  thy  plots,  thy  pleafures  thither, 
Chrift  purg'd  his  temple;  fo  muft  thou  thy  heart. 
All  worldly  thoughts  are  but  theeves  met  together 
To  couzin  thee.  Look  to  thy  aflions  well : 
For  churches  are  either  our  heav'n  or  hell. 

Judge  not  the  preacher;  for  he  is  thy  Judge: 
If  thou  miflike  him,  thou  concciv'ft  him  not. 
God  calleth  preaching  folly.  Do  not  grudge 
To  pick  out  treafures  from  an  earthen  pot. 

The  worft  fpeak  fomething  good:  if  all  want  fenfe, 
God  takes  a  text,  and  preacheth  patience. 

He  that  gets  patience,  and  the  bleffing  which 
Preachers  conclude  with,  hath  not  loft  his  pains. 
He  that  by  being  at  church  efcapes  the  ditch, 
Which  he  might  fall  in  by  companions,  gains. 
He  that  loves  Gods  abode,  and  to  combine 
With  faints  on  earth,  fhall  one  day  with  them  fliine 

Jeft  not  at  preachers  language,  orcxpreffion: 
How  know'ftthou,but  thy  finnes  made  him  mifcarrie? 
Then  turn  thy  faults  and  his  intoconfeflion: 
God  fent  him,whatfoe're  he  be :  O  tarry. 
And  love  him  for  his  Mafter :  his  condition. 
Though  it  be  ill,  makes  him  no  ill  Pbyfician. 

None 


i6  The  Church-porch. 

None  (hall  in  hell  fuch  bitter  pangs  endure. 
As  thofe,  who  mock  at  Gods  way  of  falvation. 
Whom  oil  and  balfames  kill,  what  falve  can  cure? 
They  drink  with  greedinefle  a  full  damnation. 

The  Jews  refufed  thunder;  and  we,  folly. 

Though  God  do  hedge  us  in,  yet  who  is  holy? 

Summe  up  at  night,  what  thou  haft  done  by  day ; 

And  in  the  morning,  what  thou  haft  to  do. 

Dreffe  and  undrefle  thy  foul :  mark  the  decay 

And  growth  of  it:  if  with  thy  watch,  that  too 
Be  down,  then  winde  up  both,  fince  we  fliall  be 
Moft  furely  judg'd,  make  thy  accounts  agree. 

In  brief,  acquit  thee  bravely ;  play  the  man. 
Look  not  on  pleafures  as  they  come,  but  go. 
Deferre  not  the  leaft  vertue:  lifes  poore  fpan 
Make  not  an  ell,  by  trifling  in  thy  wo. 
'  If  thou  do  ill;  the  joy  fades,  not  the  pains: 
ii  well;  the  pain  doth  fade,  the  joy  remains. 


Super- 


I? 


Superli 


immare. 


THou.whom  the  former  precepts  have 
Sprinkled  and  taught,  how  to  behave 
Thy  felf  in  church;  approach,  and  tafte 
The  churches  myfticall  repaft. 


AVoidprofanenefle;coinenot  here: 
Nothing  but  holy,  pure,  and  cleare. 
Or  that  which  groneth  to  be  fo. 
May  at  his  pcrill  further  go. 


The 


i8 


The  Church. 


The  Altar. 

A  broken  Altar,  Lord,  thy  fcrvant  reuet, 
M«de  of  a  heart ,  and    cemented    with    tearej : 
Whole  parts  are  as  thy  hand  did  frame; 
No  wortmans  tool  hath  touch'd  the  6me. 
A   Heart   alone 
I*    fuch    a   ftone  , 
As      nothing      but 
Thy  pow'r  doth  cut. 
Wherefore  each  part 
Of  my   hard  heart 
Meets  in  thi»-frame. 
To  praife  thy  name. 
That  if  I   chance  to  hold   my  peace, 
Thefe  ftones  to  praife  thee  may  not  ceafe. 
O  let  thy  blefled    Sacrifice    be   mine  . 
And    fanftiiie     this     Altar     to    be     thine. 


m 
The 


T&e  Church.  19 

f"   The  Sacrifice. 

OH  aiJ  ye,  who  pafTe  by,  whofe  eyes  and  minde 
To  worldly  things  are  fliarp  ,  but  to  me  blinde; 
Tome,  who  took  eyes  that  I  might  you  finde: 

Was  ever  grief  like  mine  ? 

The  Princes  of  my  people  make  a  head 
Agtinft  their  Maker:  they  do  wi(h  me  dead,  ~] 
Who  cannot  wifli,  except  I  give  them  bread:  J 

Was  ever  grief  like  mine  ? 

Without  me  each  one,  who  doth  now  me  brave, 

Had  to  this  day  been  an  Egyptian  flave. 

Tbey  ufe  that  power  againll  me,  which  I  gave: 

Was  ever  grief  like  mine  ( 

Mine  own  ApcftIc,who  the  bag  did  bcare. 
Though  he  had  ail  1  had,  did  not  forbeare 
To  fell  me  alfo,  and  to  put  me  there: 

Was  ever  grief.  Sec. 

For  thirtie  pence  he  did  my  death  devife. 
Who  at  three  hundred  did  the  ointment  prize. 
Not  half  fo  fweet  as  my  fweet  facrifice: 

Was  ever  grief,  tec. 

Therefore  my  foul  melts.and  my  hearts  deare  treafure 
Drops  bloud  ( t he onely  beads)  my  words  tomeafure:  I  %\^ii:,„riit-i 
O  Ut  this  cuppafe,if  it  be  iby  pleafure:  I 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

^i^^""     .  ... 

Thefe  drops  bemg  temper'd  withafinners  tears, 

A  Balfome  are  for  both  the  Hemifphcres  : 

Curing  all  wounds,  but  mine;  all  ,but  my  feart: 

Was  ever  grief,  Sec, 

Yet 


20  The  Church. 

Yet  my  Dlfciples  fleep:  I  cannot  gain 

One  houre  ofwatching;but  their  drowCe  brain 

Comforts  not  me,  and  dotli  my  doftrine  ftain: 

Was  ever  grief  hite  mine? 

Arife,  arife,  they  come.  Look  how  they  runne. 
I  Alas!  what  hafte  they  make  to  be  undone  ! 
How  with  their  lanterns  do  they  feek  the  funne  ! 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

With  clubs  and  ftaves  they  fcek  me.  as  a  thief. 
Who  am  the  way  of  truth,  the  true  relief; 
Moft  true  to  thofe,  who  are  my  grcateft  grief: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Judas,  doll  thou  betray  me  with  a  kilTe  ? 
Canfl  thou  finde  hell  about  my  lips?  and  miiTe 
Of  life,  juft  at  the  gates  of  life  and  blUTe  ? 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

See,  they  lay  hold  on  me,  not  with  the  hands 
Of  faithjbut  furie:  yet  at  their  commands 
,  I  fuffer  binding,  who  have  loos'd  their  bands: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

All  my  Difciples  flic;  fear  puts  a  barre 
Betwixt  my  friends  and  me.  They  leave  the  ftarre. 
That  brought  the  wife  men  of  the  Eaft  from  farre. 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Then  from  one  ruler  to  another  bound 
They  leade  me;  urging,  that  it  was  not  found 
What  I  taught:  Comments  would  the  text  confound. 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

The  Prieft  and  rulers  all  falfe  witnefFefeek 
'Gainft  him,  who  feeks  not  life,  but  is  the  meek 
And  readie  Pafchal  Lambe  of  this  great  week: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Then 


The  Church  2i 

Then  they  accufe  me  of  great  blafphemie, 
That  I  did  thruft  into  the  Deitie, 
Who  never  thought  that  any  robberie: 

Was  ever  grief  liice  mine  ? 

Some  faid,  that  I  the  Temple  to  the  floore 
In  three  dayes  raz'd,  and  raifed  as  before. 
Why,  he  that  built  the  world  can  do  much  more: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Then  they  condemne  me  all  with  that  fame  breath. 
Which  I  do  give  them  daily,  unto  death. 
Thus  Adam  my  firft  breathing  rendereth: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

They  binde,  and  leade  me  unto  Herod:  he 
Sends  me  to  Pilate.  This  makes  them  agree; 
But  yet  their  friendlhip  is  my  enmitie: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Herod  ind  all  his  bands  do  fet  me  light. 
Who  teach  all  hands  to  warre,  fingers  to  fight. 
And  oncly  am  the  Lord  of  hofts  and  might: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Herod  in  judgement  fits,  while  I  do  Hand ; 
Examines  me  with  a  cenforious  hand: 
I  him  obey,  who  all  things  elfe  command: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

The  Jews  accufe  me  with  defpitefulnclTe; 
And  vying  malice  with  my  gentlenefTe, 
Pick  quarrels  with  their  onely  happincfle: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c, 

I  anfwer  nothing,  but  with  patience  prove 
If  ftonie  hearts  will  melt  with  gentle  love. 
But  who  does  hawk  at  eagles  with  a  dove  } 

Was  ever  grief,&c. 


22  The  Church. 

My  filence  rather  doth  augment  their  crie; 
My  dove  doth  back  into  my  bofome  flie, 
Becaufe  the  raging  waters  ftill  are  high: 

Was  ever  grief  iike  mine? 

Heark  how  they  eric  aloud  ftill,  Crueift: 
It  is  not  Jit  be  live  a  day,  they  crie. 
Who  cannot  live  leffc  ihen  eternally: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c 

Pilate  a  ftranger  holdeth  ofF;  but  they. 
Mine  owne  deare  people,  cry,  Away,atoaj, 
With  noifes  confufed  frighting  the  day: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Yet  ftill  they  fhout,  and  crie,  and  ftop  their  earc, 
Puttingmy  life  among  their  finnesand  fears, 
And  therefore  wifti  mj  bloud  on  them  and  thein. 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Sec  how  fpite  cankers  things.  Thefe  words  aright 
Ufed,  and  widied,  are  the  whole  worlds  light; 
But  hony  is  their  gall,  brightnefle  their  night: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

They  choofe  a  murderer,  and  all  agree 
In  him  todo  themfelvesacourtefie: 
For  it  was  their  own  caufe  who  killed  me: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

And  afeditious  murderer  he  was: 
But  I  the  Prince  of  peace;  peace  that  doth  pafle 
All  underftanding,  more  then  heav'n  dothglaffc: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Why,  Cefar  is  their  onely  King,  not  I: 

He  clave  the  ftonie  rock,  when  they  were  dric; 

Butfurely  not  their  hearts,  as  I  well  trie: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Ah: 


The  Church.  23 

Ah!  how  they  fcourge  me!  yet  my  tendernefle 
Doubles  each  lafh:  and  yet  their  bittcrneffe 
Wiadet  up  my  grief  to  a  myfteriourneffe' 

Was  ever  grief  like  mine  / 

They  buffet  me,and  box  me  as  they  lift. 
Who  grafp  the  earth  and  heaven  with  my  fill, 
And  never  yet,whom  I  would  punifli,  mifs'd : 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Behold,  they  fpit  on  me  in  fcornfull  wifc> 
Who  by  my  fpittle  gave  the  blinde  man  eics. 
Leaving  his  blindneffe  to  mine  enemies: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

My  ftce  they  cover,  though  it  be  divine. 
hi  Mofes  face  was  vailed,  fo  is  mine, 
Left  on  their  double-dark  fouls  either  (hinc: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Servants  and  abjefts  flout  me;  they  are  wittie: 
Nova prophefie  mhojlrikes  thee,  is  their  dittie. 
So  they  in  me  denie  themfclvesall  pitie: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

And  now  I  am  deliver'd  unto  death. 
Which  each  one  cals  for  fo  with  utmoft  breath, 
That  he  before  me  well  nigh  fuffcreth: 

Was  ever  grief.  Sec. 

Weep  not,  deare  friends,fince  I  for  both  have  wept 
When  all  my  tears  were  bloud,  the  while  you  flcpt: 
Your  tears  for  your  own  fortunes  (hould  be  kept: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

The  fouldiers  lead  me  to  the  common  hall ;     ■ 
There  they  deride  me,  they  abufe  me  all : 
Yet  for  twelve  heav'niy  legions  I  could  call: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Then 


24  T^he  Church. 

Then  with  a  fcarlet  robe  they  me  aray; 
Which  (hews  my  bloud  to  be  the  onely  way, 
And  cordial!  left  to  repair  mans  decay : 

Was  ever  grief  like  mine? 

Tlien  on  my  head  a  crown  of  thorns  I  wear: 
For  thefe  are  all  the  grapes  Sion  doth  bear, 
Though  I  my  vine  planted  and  watred  there : 
Was  ever  grief ,  &c. 

So  fits  the  earths  great  curfe  in  Adams  fall 
U  pon  my  head :  {o  I  remove  it  all 
From  th'  earth  unto  my  brows,and  bear  the  thrall; 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Then  with  the  reed  they  gave  to  me  licfore, 

They  ftrikc  my  head,  the  rock  from  whence  all  ftore 

Of  beav'nly  blesfmgs  iffue  evermore: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

They  bow  their  knees  to  me,  and  cry,  Hail  king: 
What  ever  fcofFes  or  fcornfulnefle  can  bring, 
lam  the  floore,  the  fink,  where  they  it  fling: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Yet  fmcc  mans  fcepters  arc  as  frail  as  reeds, 
And  thorny  all  their  crowns,  bloudie  their  weeds; 
I,  who  am  Truth.turn  into  truth  their  deeds: 
Was  ever  grief ,  &c. 

The  fouldiersalfo  fpit  upon  that  face. 
Which  Angels  did  defire  to  have  the  grace, 
And  Prophets  once  to  fee,  but  found  no  place : 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Thus  trimmed  forth  they  bring  me  to  the  rout. 
Who  Crucife  bim,  crie  with  one  ftrong  fliout. 
God  holds  his  peace  at  man,and  man  cries  out: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

They 


T^he  Church.  25 

They  leade  me  in  once  more,and  putting  then 
Mine  own  clothes  on,  they  leade  me  out  agen. 
Whom  devils  flie,thus  is  he  tois'd  of  men: 

Was  ever  grief  like  mine? 

And  now  wearie  of  fport,glad  to  ingrofle 
All  fpiteinone,countingmy  life  their  lofle. 
They  carrie  me  to  my  moft  bitter  croiTe: 

Was  e  ver  grief,  &c. 

My  crpfle  I  bear  my  felf  ,  untill  I  faint: 
Then  Simon  bears  it  for  me  by  conftraint. 
The  decreed  burden  of  each  mortall  Saint : 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

O  all  ye  whopaffe  by,  behold  and  fee  ; 

Man  ftole  the  fruit,but  I  muftclimbe  the  tree; 

The  tree  of  life  to  all,  but  onely  me : 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Lojhere  I  hang,  charg'd  with  a  worldoffinne, 
The  greater  world  o'th'  two ;  for  that  came  in 
By  words,  but  this  by  forrow  I  muft  win : 

Was  ever  grief ,  &c. 

Such  forrow,  as  if  linfull  man  could  feel, 
Or  feel  his  part,he  would  not  ceafe  to  kneel. 
Till  all  were  melted,though  he  were  all  ftcel: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

But,  O  my  God,  my  God  1  why  leav'ft  thou  me. 
The  fonne,  in  whom  thou  doll  delight  to  be  ? 

My  God,  my  God 

Never  was  grief  like  mine. 

Shame  tears  ray  foul  rtiy  bodie  many  a  wound; 
Sharp  nails  pierce  this,  but  Iharper  that  confound; 
Reproches,whicharcfree,while  I  am  bound. 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 


26  'The  Church. 

Now  heal  thy  feIf,Phyfician;now come  down. 
/\ias !  I  did  fo,  when  I  left  my  crown 
And  fathers  fmilc  for  you, to  feel  his  frown: 

Wasevergrief  like  mine? 

In  healing  not  my  felf,  there  doth  confill 
All  that  falvation, which  ye  now  refill; 
Your  fafetie  in  my  ficknefTe  doth  fubfitt: 

Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

Betwixt  two  theeves  I  fpend  my  utmoft  breath. 
As  he  that  for  fome  robberie  fufFereth. 
Alas!  what  have  I  llollen  from  you?  death: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

A  king  my  title  is,  prefixt  on  high  ; 
Yet  by  my  fubjefts  am  condemn'd  to  die 
A  ferviJe  death  in  fervile  companie: 

Was  ever  grief ,  &c. 

They  gave  me  vineger  mingled  with  gall, 
Butmorewithmalicc:  yet.when  they  did  call. 
With  Manna,  Angels  food,  I  fed  them  all: 
Was  ever  grief,  &c. 

They  part  my  garments,and  by  lot  difpofe 
My  coat,  the  type  of  love,  which  once  cur'd  thofe 
Who  fought  for  help,  never  malicious  foes: 
Wasevergrief,  &c. 

Nay,after  death  their  fpite  (hall  further  go; 
For  they  will  pierce  my  fide,  I  full  well  know; 
That  as  finne  came,  fo  Sacraments  might  flow: 
Wasevergrief  ,&c. 

But  now  I  die;  now  all  is  finilhed. 
My  wo,  mans  weal;  and  now  I  bow  my  head. 
Oncly  let  others  fay,when  ]  am  dead. 
^  Nevervvasgrieflikemine. 


The  Church.  VJ 

^  The  Thankfgiving. 

OH  King  of  grief!  (  a  title  ftrange,  yet  true, 
To  thee  of  all  kings  onely  due  ) 
Oh  King  of  wounds !  how  ihall  I  grieve  for  thee, 

Who  in  all  grief  preventeft  me  ? 
Shall  I  weep  bloud?  why  thou  haft  wept  fuch  fto:c 

That  all  thy  body  was  one  doore. 
Shall  I  be  fcourged,  flouted,  boxed, fold  T 

'Tis  but  to  tell  the  tale  is  told. 
Mj  God,  my  God,toby  doft  thou  part  from  mt^ 

Was  fuch  a  grief  as  cannot  be. 
Shall  I  then  fing,  skipping,  thy  dolefull  ftorie, 

And  fide  with  thy  triumphant  glorie?    ._. — -, 
Shall  thy  ftrokes  be  my  ilrqking?  [  thorns,  my  flo/.er:  ) 

Thy  rod, my  pofie^croffe.my  bow£lL/ 
But  how  then  ihall  TTmiGte  thee; and 

Copi.e  thy  fair,  though  bloudie hand/ 
Surely  I  will  reuciige  me  on  thy  love. 

And  trie  who  (hall  viflorious  prove. 
If  thou  doft  give  me  wealth;  I  will  rellore 

All  back  unto  thee  by  the  poore. 
If  thou  doft  give  mc  honour;  men  Ihall  fee. 

The  honour  doth  belong  to  thee. 
I  will  not  marry;  or,  if  ftie  be  mine. 

She  and  her  children  Ihall  be  thine. 
My  bofome  friend, if  he  blafpheme  thy  name, 

I  will  tear  thence  his  love  and  fame. 
One  half  of  me  being  gone,  the  reft  I  give 

Untofome  Chappell,die  or  live. 
.■\5  for  thvpafiioii-— But  of  that  anon, 

When  with  the  other  I  have  done. 
Fo;  thy  predeilination  I'le  contrive. 

That  three  yeares  hence,  if  I  furvivc, 

B  2  y^ 


28  The  Church. 

ric  build  a  fpittle,  or  mend  common  wayes, 

But  mend  mine  own  without  delayes. 
Then  I  will  ufe  the  works  of  thycreation. 

As  if  I  us'd  them  but  for  falhion. 
The  world  and  I  will  quarrell;  and  the  yearc 

Shall  not  perceive,  that  I  am  here. 
pe^vA  -J  Mj^fliufigk  fhall  (inde  thee,  and  ev'ry  ftring 

Shall  have  his  attribute  to  fing ; 
That  all  together  may  accord  in  thee, 

And  prove  one  God,  one  harmonic. 
If  thou  fhalt  pive  me  wit,  it  ftiall  appeare^ 

If  jhou  haftgjv'n  it  me,  'tiii^er^  r  •■"  ' 

"Nay,  I  will  reade[tlvy\boa^and  never  move 

Till  I  have  found  therein  thy  love; 
Thy  art  of  love,  which  I'le  turn  back  on  thee, 

O  my  deare  Saviour,  Viftorie! 
Then  for  thy  paffion—  I  will  do  for  that— 

Alas,  my  God,  I  know  not  what. 


f  The  Reprifall. 

1  Haveconfider'd  it,  and  finde 
There  is  no  dealing  with  thy  mighty  paffion: 
For  though  I  die  for  thee,  I  am  behinde ; 

My  fmnes  deferve  the  condemnation. 

O  make  me  innocent,  that  I 
May  give  a  difen tangled  ftate  and  free: 
And  yet  thy  wounds  ftill  my  attempts  defie, 

For  by  thy  death  I  die  for  thee. 

Ah !  was  it  not  enough  that  thou 
By  thy  eternall  glorie  didft  outgo  me? 
Couldft  thou  not  griefs  fad  conqueih  me  allow. 

But  in  all  via'ries  overthrow  me? 

Yci 


The  Church.  29 

Yet  by  confeffion  will  I  come 
[nto  the  conqueft.  Though  I  can  do  nought 
Againil  thee,in  thee  I  will  overcome 

The  man,  who  once  againft  thee  fought. 


^  The  Agonie. 

X  Hilofophers  have  meafur'd  mountains, 
Fathom'd  the  depths  of  feas,  of  Hates,  and  kings, 
Walk'd  with  a  ftaffe  to  heav'n,and  traced  fountains: 

But  there  are  two  vaft,  fpacious  things. 
The  which  to  meafure  it  doth  more  behove: 
Yet  few  there  are  that  found  them;  Sinne  and  Love 

Who  would  know  Sinne,  let  him  repair 
Unto  mount  Olivet;  there  Ihall  he  fee 
A  man  fo  wrung  with  pains,  that  all  his  hair, 

His  skinne,  his  garments  bloudie  be. 
Sinne  is  thatpreffe  and  vice,  which  forceth  pain 
To  hunt  his  cruell  food  through  ev'ry  vein. 

Who  knows  not  Love,  let  him  aflay 
And  tafte  that  juice,  which  on-the  croffe  a  pike 
Did  fet  again  abroach;  then  let  him  fay 

If  ever  he  did  tafte  the  like. 
Love  is  that  liquour  fvveet  and  moft  divine, 
Which  my  God  feels  as  bloud;  but  I,  as  wine. 

B3  H   The 


30  The  Church. 

^  The  Sinner. 

LOrd,  how  I  am  all  ague,  when  I  feck 
What  I  have  treafur'd  in  my  memorie ! 
Since,  if  my  foul  make  even  with  the  week. 

Each  feventh  note  by  right  is  due  to  thee. 

I  finde  there  quarries  of  pil'd  vanities. 

But  fhreds  of  holinefle,  that  dare  not  venture 
To  (hew  their  face,  fincc  croflc  to  thy  decrees: 

There  the  circumference  earth  is,  heav'n  the  centre. 

In  fo  much  dregs  the  quinteffence  is  fmall: 

The  fpirit  and  good  extraft  of  my  heart 
Comes  to  about  the  many  hundredth  part. 

Ye:  Lord  reftore  thine  image,  heare  my  call :  (grone, 
And  though  my  hard  heart  fcarce  to  thee  can 
Remember  that  thou  once  didft  write  in  ftonc. 


o 


^  Good  Friday. 


My  chief  good. 
How  (hail  I  meafure  out  thy  bloud? 
How  (hall  I  count  what  thee  befell, 
And  each  grief  tell? 

Shall  I  thy  woes 
Number  according  to  thy  foes.' 
Ot,  fince  one  ftarre  (how'd  thv  firft  breath. 

Shall  all  thy  death? ' 

Or  (hall  each  leaf, 
Which  falls  in  Autumne,  fcore  agrief 
Or  cannot  leaves,  but  fruit,'Wfi£neJ 

Of  the  true  vine?" 

Then 


The  Church.  31 

Then  let  each  houre 
Ot  my  whole  life  one  grief  dcvoure  5 
That  thy  diftrefle  through  all  may  runne. 

Andbemyfunne. 

Or  rather  let 
My  feverall  finnes  their  forrows  get; 
That  as  each  beall  his  cure  doth  know. 

Each  finne  may  fo. 

Since  blond  is  fitted.  Lord  ,  to  write 
Thy  forrows  in,  and  bloudie  fight; 
My  heart  hath  ftore,  write  there,  where  in 
One  box  doth  lie  both  ink  andfinne: 

That  when  finne  fpies  io  many  foes. 
Thy  whips,  thy  nails,  thy  wounds,  thy  woes. 
All  come  to  lodge  there,  finne  may  fay, 
A#  room  for  me,  and  flic  away. 

Sinne  being  gone,  oh  fill  the  place. 
And  keep  pofleffion  with  thy  grace ; 
Left  finne  take  courage  and  return. 
And  all  the  wrijing5_blot  or  burn. 


H    Redemption. 

HAving  been  tenant  long  to  a  rich  Lord, 
Not  thriving,  I  refolved  to  be  bold. 
And  make  a  fuit  unto  him,  to  afford 
A  new  fmall-rented  Icafe,  and  canccU  th'  old. 

In  heaven  at  his  manour  I  him  fought: 

They  told  me  there,  that  he  was  lately  gone 
Aboutfomeland.which  he  had  dearly  bought 

Long  fi  nee  on  earth,  to  take  polTeflion. 

B  4  f 


32  The  Church. 

I  ftraight  return'd.and  knowing  his  great  birth, 
Sought  him  accordingly  in  great  reforts; 
In  cities,  theatres,  gardens,  parks,  and  courts: 

At  length  I  heard  a  ragged  noife  and  mirth 

Of  theeves  and  murderers:  there  I  him  efpied. 
Who  ftraight,  J'sar/i;/  is  grant  ed,{z\^.fi.k\^. 

^  Sepulchre. 

OBlefled  bodie !  Whither  art  thou  thrown? 
No  lodging  for  thee,  but  a  cold  hard  ftone? 
So  many  hearts  on  earth,  and  yet  not  one 
Receive  thee  ? 

Sure  there  is  room  within  our  hearts  good  ftore 
For  they  can  lodge  tranfgreffions  by  the  fcore: 
Thoufands  of  toycs  dwell  there,  yet  out  of  doore 
They  leave  thee. 

But  that  which  (hews  them  large.fhews  them  unfit. 
What  ever  finne  did  this  pure  rock  commit. 
Which  holds  thee  now  t  Who  hath  indited  it 
Of  murder? 

^thee, 
Whereour  hard  hearts  have  took  up  ftonesto  brain 
And  miffing  this,  moft  falfly  did  arraigne  thee ; 
Onely  thefe  ftones  in  quiet  entertain  thee, 
Aild  order. 

And  as  of  old,  the  law  by  heav'nly  art 
Was  writ  in  ftone ;  fo  thou,  which  alfo  art 
The  letter  of  the  word,  find'ft  no  fit  heart 
To  hold  thee. 

Yet  do  we  ftill  perfift  as  we  began. 
And  fo  fhould  perifti,  but  that  nothing  can, 
Though  it  be  cold,  hard,  foul,  from  loving  man 
Withold  thee. 


T^he  Church. 
^  Eafter. 

Rife  heart;  thy  Lord  is  rifcn.  Sing  hit  praife 
Without  delayes. 
Who  take*  thee  by  the  hand  ,  that  thou  likewifc 

With  him  mayft  rife  • 
That,  as  his  death  calcined  thee  to  dull. 
His  life  may  make  thee  gold,  and  much  more  juft. 

Awake,  my  lute,  and  ftruggk  for  thy  part 

With  all  thy  art. 

Thecroffe  taught  all  wood  to  refound  his  name, 

Who  bore  the  fame. 
His  ftreched  fjnews  taught  allftrings,  what  key 
is  beft  to  celebrate  this  moft  high  day. 

Confort  both  heart  and  lute,  and  twill  a  fong 

Pleafant  and  long : 

Or  fince  all  mufick  is  but  three  parts  vied 

And  multiplied ; 

0  let  thy  bleffed  Spirit  bear  a  part , 

And  make  up  our  defefls  with  his  fweet  art. 

1  got  me  flowers  to  draw  thy  way; 
I  got  me  boughs  off  many  a  tree: 
But  thou  waft  up  by  break  of  day. 

And  brought'ft  thy  fweets  along  with  thee, 

The  Sunne  arifing  in  the  Eaft, 
Though  he  give  light,  &  th'  Eaft  perfume ; 
\'i  they  (hould  offer  to  conteft 
With  thy  arifing,  they  prefume. 

Can  there  be  any  day  but  this. 
Though  many  funnes  to  (hine endeavour? 
We  count  three  hundred,  but  we  miffe: 
There  is  but  one,  and  that  one  ever. 

B  5  Enftcr 


The  Church. 
^  Eafter  wings. 


H  5* 

^  ^  ^  I-.  S^  B. 

""■'trS        "Scrips 

-»    ^  o  o  e» 

i-  s.  i.  3  »  3 

»  «  sr 

00  ^ 


Eafter 


T-^e  C-6ttrf-6 

• 

11 

Eafter 

wings. 

> 

§ 

3 

•fl 

> 

*< 

5 

S^  > 

H 

g. 

!> 

5' 

9 

si 

r 

^   1 

» 

I 

n 

Si- 

3 

r» 

5" 

H- 1 

CI. 

s: 

-s 

s 

s  day  thy  v 
1  my  wing 

o 

3 
2t 
5' 

n 

ri' 

3 
a 

s 

9> 
B 

1 

5" 

•1 

3 

s- 

§    § 

9 

S 

!•*          ^ 

a 

S" 

o. 

o5' 

3"    n' 

3      ••■ 

:» 

•ft 

3 

EI 

:r 

<» 

o 

w 

5r 

•rt* 

00, 

9 

i 

a' 
s 
o 

35 


H.  Ba- 


I 


36 


The  Church. 


^  H.  Baptifme, 

As  he  that  fees  a  dark  and  ftiadie  gro»«, 
Stayes  not,  but  looks  beyond  i  t  on  the  skie ; 
So  when  I  view  my  finne»,  mine  eyes  remove 
More  backward  ftill,  and  to  chat  water  Hie, 

Which  is  above  the  hcav'ns,  whofe  fpring  and  rent 
Is  in  my  deare  Redeemers  pierced  fide. 
O  bleffed  ftreams !  either  ye  do  prevent 

And  ftop  our  finnes  from  growing  thick  and  wide, 

Orelfegive  tears  todrownthem,as  they  grow. 
In  you  Redemption  meafures  all  my  time. 
And fpreads the piaifterequall  to thecrime: 

You  taught  the  book  of  life  my  name,  thatfo 

What  ever  future  finnes  fhouldmemifcail,'' 
Your  firft  acquaintance  might  difcredit  all. 

^  H.  Baptifme. 

Oince.Lord,  to  thee 
A  narrow  way  and  little  gate 
I>  all  the  paiTage,  on  my  infancie 

Thou  didft  lay  hold,  and  antedate 
My  faith  in  me. 

O  let  me  ftill 
Write  thee  great  God  ,  andmcachilde 
Let  me  be  foft  and  fupple  to  thy  will, 

Small  to  my  felf,  to  others  miide, 

Behither  ill. 

Although  by  ftealth 
My  flefh  get  on,  yet  let  her  fifter 
My  foul  bid  nothing,  but  preferve  her  wealth: 
The  growth  of  flefh  is  but  a  blifter , 

Childhood  is  health. 


The  Cburcb.  37 

^  Nature. 

Full  of  rebellion,  I  would  die. 
Or  fight,  or  travell,  or  denie 
Thac  thou  haft  ought  to  do  with  rae. 

O  tame  my  heart; 
It  is  thy  higheft  art 
To  captivate  ftrong  holds  to  thee. 

If  thou  (halt  let  this  venome  lurk. 
And  in  fuggcftions  fume  and  work. 
My  foul  wUl  turn  to  bubbles  ftraight. 

And  thence  by  kinde 
Vanilhintoawinde, 
Making  thy  workmanlhip deceit. 

O  fmooth  my  rugged  heart,  and  there 
Engrave  thy  rev'rend  law  and  fear; 
Or  make  a  new  one,  fince  the  old 

Is  faplefle  grown, 
And  a  much  fitter  ftone 
To  hide  my  duft,  then  thee  to  hold. 


^  Sinne. 

LOrd  ,  with  what  care  haft  thou  begirt  us  round ! 
Parents  firft  feafon  us:  then  fchoolmafters 
Deliver  us  to  layys  ;  they  fend  UJ  bound 
To  rules  of  reafon,  holy  meflcngers. 

Pulpits  and  fundayes,  forrow  dogging  finne, 
AflSiftionsforted,  anguilhof  all  fizes. 
Fine  nets  and  ftrategems  to  catch  us  in. 

Bibles  laid  open,  millions  of  furprifei  , 

Bleffings 


38  the  Church. 

Bleflings  beforehand,  tyes  of  gratefulnefle. 
The  found  of  glorie  ringing  in  our  eares: 
Without.our  (hame;  within,  our  confciences ; 

Angels  and  grace,  eternall  hopes  and  fears. 

Yet  all  ihefe  fences  and  their  whole  aray 
One  cunning  bofome-finne  blows  quite  away. 


^  Affliftion. 

■mHen  firft  thou  did  ft  entice  to  thee  my  heart, 
*  '  1 1  bought  the  fervice  brave : 

So  many  joyes  I  writ  down  for  my  part, 

Befides  what  I  might  have 
Out  of  my  ftock  of  natural!  delights. 
Augmented  with  thy  gracious  benefit*. 

I  looked  on  thy  furniture  fo  fine, 

And  made  it  fine  to  me : 

Thy  glorious  houfhold-ftuffe  did  me  entwine. 
And  'tice  me  unto  thee. 

Such  ftarres  I  counted  mine :  both  heav'n  and  earth 

Payd  me  my  wages  in  a  world  of  mirth. 

What  pleafures  could  I  want,whofe  King  I  ferved? 

Where  joyes  my  fellows  were. 
Thus  argu'd  into  hopes,  my  thoughts  refcrved 

No  place  for  grief  or  fear. 
Therefore  my  fudden  foul  caught  at  the  place. 
And  made  her  youth  and  fiercencffe  feek  thy  face. 

At  firft  thou  gav'ft  me  milk  and  fweetnefles; 

I  had  my  wifti  and  way: 
My  dayea  were  ftraw'd  with  flow'rs  and  happineffe ; 
There  was  no  rooneth  but  May. 
But  with  my  yeares  forrow  did  twift  and  grow, 
And  made  a  partie  unawares  for  wo.  My 


The  Church.  39 

My  fleih  began  unto  my  foul  in  pain, 

Sicknefles  cleave  my  bones ; 
Confuming  agues  dwell  in  ev'ry  vein,- 

And  tune  my  breath  togrones. 
Sorrow  was  all  my  foul ;  I  fcarce  beleeved, 
Till  grief  did  tell  me  roundly,  that  I  lived. 

When  I  got  health,thou  took'ft  away  my  life, 

And  more;  for  my  friends  die; 
My  mirth  and  edge  was  loft;  a  blunted  knife 

Was  of  more  ufe  then  I. 
Thus  thinne  and  lean  without  a  fence  or  friend, 
I  was  blown  through  with  ev'ry  ftorm  and  winde. 

Whereas  my  birth  and  fpirit  rather  took 

The  way  that  takes  the  town; 

Thou  didft  betray  me  to  a  lingring  book. 

And  wrap  me  in  a  gown. 

I  was  entangled  in  the  vyorld  of  ftrife. 

Before  I  had  the  power  to  change  my  life. 

Yet,  for  I  threatned  oft  the  fiege  to  raife. 

Not  fimpring  all  mine  age. 

Thou  often  didft  with  Academick  praife 

Melt  and  diffolve  my  rage. 

I  took  thy  fweetned  pill,  till  I  came  neare; 

I  could  not  go  away,  nor  perfevere. 


Yet  left  perchance  I  fliould  too  happic  be 
In  my  unhappinelTe, 

Turning  my  purge  to  food,thou  throweft  me 
Into  more  ficknefles. 

Thus  doth  thy  power  croffe-bias  me,not  making 

Thine  own  gift  good,  yet  me  from  my  wayes  taking. 

Now 


4©  The  Church. 

Now  I  am  here,  what  thou  wilt  do  with  me 

None  of  roy  books  will  fbow : 

I  reade,  and  figh,  and  wi(h  I  were  a  tree; 

For  Aire  then  I  (hould  grow 

To  fruit  or  (hade:  at  leaft  fome  bird  would  tiuft 

Her  houfhold  to  me,  and  I  fhould  be  juft. 

Yet.though  thou  troubleft  me,  I  mull  be  meek ; 

In  weakneiTe  mull  be  flout. 
Well,  I  will  change  the  fcrvice,  and  go  feek 

Some  other  mailer  out. 
Ah  my  dcare  God!  though  I  am  clean  forgot. 
Let  me  not  love  thee,  if  I  love  thee  not. 


%  Repentance. 

LOrd  .Iconfcfle  my  Cnne  is  great; 
Greatismy  finne.  Oh!  gently  treat 
With  thy  quick  flow'r,  thy  momentanie  bloom; 
Whofe  life  ftill  preffing 
Is  one  undreffing, 
A  fteadie  aiming  at  a  tombe. 

Mans  age  is  two  houres  work,  or  three: 
Each  day  doth  round  about  us  fee. 
Thus  arc  we  to  delights :  but  we  are  all 

To  forrows  old, 

Iflifcbetold 
From  what  life  feelech,  Adams  &n. 

O  let  thy  height  of  mercie  then 
Compaffionate  (hort-breathed  men. 
Cut  me  not  off  for  my  moft  foul  ttansgreflion 
Idoconfefie 
Myfoolifhnefle; 
My  God,accept  of  ray  confeffioB. 

Sweeten 


The  Church.  41 

Sweeten  at  length  this  bitter  bowl. 
Which  thou  hall  pour'd  into  my  foul;  (ther: 

Thy  wormwood  turn  to  health,  windes  to  fair  wea- 

For  if  thou  ftay, 

I  and  this  day. 
As  we  did  rife,  we  die  together. 

When  thou  forfinnerebukeft  man. 
Forthwith  he  waxeth  woand  wan: 
Bitterneffe  fills  our  bowels ;  all  our  hearts 
Pine,  and  decay. 
And  drop  away, 
And  carrje  with  them  th'  other  parts. 

But  thou  wilt  finne  and  grief  deftroy; 

That  fo  the  broken  bones  may  joy. 
And  tune  together  in  a  vvell-fet  fong. 
Full  of  his  praifes. 
Who  dead  men  railes. 

Fraftures  well  cur'd  make  us  nwre  ftrong. 


t  Faith. 

LOrd,  how  couldft  thou  fo  much  appeafe 
Thy  wrath  for  finne,  as  when  mans  fight  was  dimrae. 
And  could  fee  little,  to  regard  his  eafe, 

And  bring  by  Faith  all  things  to  him? 

Hungric  I  was,  and  had  no^meat: 
I  did  ^ncei^a  moft  delicious  feaft ;     .•.^i.»a-  >i,^„,.-<.i  1--',.^^^^ 
I  had  it  ftraight,  and  did  as  truly  eat,  ■  k^k.*- ■■  ^^^\^^^ ^  n- 

As  ever  did  a  welcome  gueft. 

There  is  a  rjire  outlandifh  root, 
Which  when  I  could  not  get,  I  thought  it  here : 
Thatapprehenfion  cur'd  fo  well  m^ffooQ  ^n.,^  -  ^^J^^ 

That  I  can  walk  to  heav'n  well  neare.  I 


42  The  Church. 

I  owed  thoufands  and  much  more: 
I  did  beleeve  that  I  did  nothing  owe, 
And  liv'd  accordingly;  my  creditor 

Belecves  fo  too,  and  lets  me  go. 

Faith  malces  me  any  thing,  or  all 
That  I  beleeve  is  in  the  facred  ftorie : 
And  where  finne  placeth  me  in  Adams  fall. 

Faith  fets  me  higher  in  his  glorie. 

If  I  go  lower  in  the  book, 
What  can  be  lower  then  the  common  manger? 
Faith  puts  me  there  with  him,  who  fweetly  took 

Our  flefli  and  frailtie,  death  and  danger. 

If  bliffe  had  lien  in  art  or  ftrength. 
None  but  the  wife  or  ftronghad  gained  it: 
Where  now  by  Faith  all  arms  are  of  a  length; 

One  fize  doth  all  conditions  fit. 

A  peafant  may  beleeve  as  much 
As  a  great  Clerk,  and  reach  the  higheftftature. 
Thus  doft  thou  make  proud  knowledge  bend  &  crouch 

While  grace  fills  up  uneven  nature. 

When  creatures  had  no  reall  light 
Inherent  in  them,  thou  didft  make  the  funne. 
Impute  a  luftre,  and  allow  them  bright; 

And  in  this  (hew,  what  Chrift  hath  done. 

That  which  before  was  darkncd  clean 
With  bulhie  groves,  pricking  the  lookers  eie, 
Vanilht  away ,w hen  Faith  did  change  the  fcene: 

And  then  appear'd  a  glorious  skie. 

What  though  my  bodie  runne  to  duftf 
Faith  cleaves  unto  it.countingevr'y  grain 
With  an  exa£l  and  moll  particular  truft, 

Refcrving  all  for  flefh  agafji. 

f  Prayer. 


The  Church.  43 

^  Prayer. 

PRayer  the  Churches  banquet.  Angels  age, 
Gods  breath  irj  man  returning  to  his  birth. 
The  foul  in  paraphrafe.  heart  in  pilgrimage. 
The  ChriiUan  plummet  founding  heav'n  and  earth ; 
'>^ 
Ijilngine  againft  th' Almightiejfinners  towre, 

Reverfed  thunder,  Chrill-fide-piercing  fpear. 
The  fix-daies  world-tranfpofing  in  an  houre, 
A  kinde  of  tune,  which  all  things  heare  and  fear; 

Softnefle,and  peace,  and  joy,  and  love,  and  blifle. 
Exalted  Manna,  gladneffe  of  the  beft, 
Heaven  in  ordinarie,man  well  dreft, 

The  milkie  way,  the  bird  of  Paradife, 

(  bloud, 
Church-bels  beyond  the  ftarres  heard,  the  fouls 
The  land  of  fpices;  fomething  undcrftood. 


^  The  H.  Communion. 

NOtJnriclt  furniture!  or  fine  aray, 
^'TJor  in  a  wed^e  of  gold, 

Thou,  who  from  me  waft  fold. 
To  me  doft  now  thy  felf  convey; 
r  h  thou  (hould'ft  without  me  ftili  have  been. 
Leaving  within  mefinne: 

But  by  the  way  of  nourilhrnent  and  ftrengh 

Thou  creep'rt  into  my  brcaft; 

Making  thy  way  my  reft, 
And  thy  fmall  quantities  my  length;  A  >'-'<^--\«.^^w  ;      'V>~«^  •,~t.^i  .  f- 
Which  fpread  their  forces  into  every  part. 

Meeting  finnes  force  and  art. 


44  T^he  Church, 

Yet  can  thefe  not  get  over  to  my  foul. 

Leaping  the  wall  that  parts 

Our  fouls  and  flefhly  hearts; 
But  as  th'  outworks,  they  may  control! 
My  rebel-fleft),  and  carrying  thy  name. 

Affright  both  finne  and  fhame. 

Onely  thy  grace,  which  with  thefe  elements  comes, 

Knoweth  the  ready  way, 

And  hath  the  priyie  key, 
Op'ning  the  fouls  moft  fubtilettxtgms;  \ 
While  thofe  to  fpirits  refin'd,  at  doore  attend 

Difpatches  from  their  friend. 


Give  nie  my  captive  foul ,  or  take 

My  bodie  alfo  thither. 
Another  lift  like  this  will  make 

Them  both  to  be  together. 

Before  that  finne  turn'd  flelh  to  Hone, 
And  all  our  lump  to  leaven; 

A  fervent  figh  might  well  have  blown 
Our  innocent  earth  to  heaven. 

For  fure  when  Adam  did  not  know 
To  finne,  or  finne  to  fmother; 

He  might  to  heav'n  from  Paradife  g". 
As  from  one  room  t'another. 

Thou  haft  reftor'd  us  to  this  eafe 
By  this  thy  heav'nly  bloud  ;  \ 

Which  I  can  go  to,  when  I  pleafc,-'- 

And  leave  th' earth  to  their  food. 


\  Antiphon. 


The  Church.  45 

^    Antiphon. 

Cho.T    Ec  all  the  world  in ev'ry  corner  fing^ 
I  t  My  God  and  King. 

Ven.     The  heav'ns  are  not  too  high, 
Hispraife  may  thither  flie: 
The  earth  is  not  too  low , 
His  praifes  there  may  grow. 

Cha,  Let  all  the  world  in  ev'ry  comer  fing. 
My  God  and  King. 

Vers.    The  church  with  pfalms  muftfhout. 
No  doore  can  keep  them  out: 
But  above  all,  the  heart 
Muft  bear  the  longeft  part. 

Cho.  Let  all  the  world  in  ev'ry  corner  fing. 
My  God  and  King. 


%     Love  I. 

IMmortall  Love,authour  of  this  great  frame. 
Sprung  from  that  beautie  which  can  never  fade; 
How  hath  man  parcel'd  out  thy  glorious  name. 
And  thrown  it  on  that  duft  which  thou  haft  made. 

While  mortall  love  doth  all  the  titlegain! 
Which  fidingwith  invention,  they  together 
Bear  all  the  fway  ,  pofleffing  heart  and  brain, 

(Thy  workmanfhip)  and  give  thee  ftiare  in  neither. 

Wit 


I 


46  The  Church. 

Wit  fancies  beautie,  beautie  raifeth  wit: 

Tlie  world  is  theirs ;  they  two  play  out  the  game. 
Thou  {landing  by  :  and  though  thy  glorious  name 

Wrought  our  deliverance  from  th'  infernall  pit. 

Who  fings  thy  praife?onely  a  skarf  or  glove    (love. 
Doth  warm  our  hands ,  and  make  them  write  of 


II. 

IMmortall  Heat,  O  let  thy  greater  flame 
Attraft  thelefler  toit:  let  thofe  fires. 
Which  (hall  confume  the  vvorld.firft  make  it  tame; 
And  kindle  in  our  hearts  fuch  true  defires, 

As  may  confume  our  lulls ,  and  make  thee  way. 

Then  (hall  our  hearts  pant  theejthen  fhall  our  b«in 

All  her  invention  on  thine  Altar  lay. 
And  there  in  hy  mnes  fend  back  thy  fire  again : 

Our  eies  fliall  fee  thee,  which  before  faw  dull ; 

Dull  blown  by  wit,  til!  that  they  both  were  blinde: 
Thou  Ihalt  recover  all  thy  goods  in  kinde. 

Who  wert  difleized  by  ul'urping  lull: 

All  knees  fliall  bow  to  thee;  all  wits  Ihall  rife. 
And  praife  him  who  did  make  and  mend  our  eies. 


H 


^  The  Temper. 

Ow  (hould  I  praiib  tlice  ,  Lord  !  how  ihould  m> 
Gladly  engrave  thy  love  in  ftecl,  (rymci 

If  what  my  foul  doth  feci  fometiraes. 
My  fouluiiVli.  -vcr  feel! 

Al- 


The  Church.  47 

Although  there  were  fome  fourtic  heav'ns,orinore. 
Sometimes  I  peere  above  them  all ; 
Sometimes  I  hardly  reach  a  fcore, 
Sometimes  to  hell  I  fall. 

O  rack  me  not  to  fuch  a  vaft  extent; 
Thofe  diftances  belong  to  thee : 
The  world's  too  little  for  thy  tent, 
A  grave  too  big  for  me. 

Wilt  thou  meet  arms  with  man,  that  thou  daft  ftretch 
A  crumme  of  duft  from  heav'n  to  hell? 
Will  great  God  meafure  with  a  wretch?  "1 
Shall  he  thy  ftature  fpell?  J 

O  let  me,  when  thy  roof  my  foul  hath  hid, 
O  let  me  rooft  and  neftle  there: 
Then  of  a  finner  thou  art  rid , 
And  I  ot  hope  and  fear. 

Yet  take  thy  way  ;  for  fure  thy  way  is  beft:  "]  ^^^^  ^^  ,  ,^ 
Stretch  or  contraft  me  thy  poore  debter: 
This  is  but  tuning  of  my  breaft,  | 
To  make  the  mufick  better.  \ 

Whether  I  flie  with  angels,  fall  with  duft,     "-i 

Thy  hands  made  both.and  I  am  there:      \ 

Thy  power  and   love,  my  loveandtruft  I 

Make  one  place  ev'ry  where.         J 

•)[  The  Temper. 

ITcannotbe.  Wfiere  is  tha;  ••;,'•.!•.;<  i;v. 
Which  juft  now  took  w;-  n..  ,  '- h^^ni 
Lord,  if  thou  miifl.  ncttis  ufc  rhy  dart. 
Save  that ,  and  me;  or  fin  for  both  deftroy. 

The 


48  The  Church. 

The  grofser  world  ftands  to  thy  word  and  art  • 
But  thy  diviner  world  of  grace 
Thou  fuddenly  doft  raife  and  race. 

And  ev'ry  day  a  new  Creatour  art. 

O  fix  thy  chair  of  grace,  that  all  my  powers 
May  alfo  fix  their  reverence: 
For  when  thou  doft  depart  from  hence. 

They  grow  unruly,  and  fit  in  thy  bowers. 

Scatter,  or  bindc  them  all  to  bend  to  thee: 

Though  elements  change,  and  heaven  move. 
Let  not  thy  higher  Court  remove. 

But  keep  a  ftanding  Majeftie  in  me. 


^    Jordan. 

WHo  fayes  that  fidlions  oncly  and  falfc  hair 
Become  a  verfe?  Is  there  in  truth  nobeautie? 
Is  all  good  ftruflure  in  a  winding  ftairf 
May  no  lines  pafle,  except  they  do  their  dutie 
Not  to  a  true,  but  painted  chair? 

Is  it  no  verfe,  except  enchanted  groves 
And  fudden  arbours  Ihadow  courfe-fpunne  lines? 
Muft  purling  ftreams  refrelh  a  lovers  loves? 
^TVIuft  all  be  vail'd,  while  he  that  reades,  divines, 
\^     Catching  the  fenfe  at  two  removes? 

Shepherds  are  honeft  people;  let  them  fing: 
Riddle  who  lift,  for  me,  and  pull  for  Prime: 
I  envie  no  mans  nightingale  or  fpring; 
Nor  let  them  punifh  me  with  lofie  of  rymc. 
Who  plainly  fay,  i^y  God,  My  King. 


%  Employ- 


The  Church. 
^  Employment. 

IF  as  a  flowre  doth  fpread  and  die. 
Thou  wouldft  extend  me  to  fonie  good. 
Before  I  were  by  frofts  extremitie 

Nipt  in  the  bud; 

The  fweetnefle  and  the  praife  were  thine ; 
But  the  extenfion  and  the  room, 
Which  in  thy  garland  I  ftiould  fill,  were  mine 
At  thy  great  doom. 

For  aj  thou  doft  impart  thy  grace. 
The  greater  (hall  ourglorie  be. 
Tile  meafure  of  our  joyes  is  in  this  place. 

The  ftuffe  with  thee. 

Let  me  not  languifh  then,  and  fpend 
A  life  as  barren  to  thy  praife. 
As  is  the  dufl,to  which  that  life  doth  tend, 
But  with  delaies. 

All  things  are  bufie;  onely  I 
Neither  bring  hony  with  the  bees. 
Nor  flowret  to  make  that,  nor  the  husbandric 
To  water  thefc. 


I  am  no  link  of  thy  great  chain. 
But  all  my  companie  is  a  weed. 
Lord  place  me  in  thy  confort;give  one  ftrai 
To  my  poo  re  reed 


50  The  Church. 

^  The  H.  Scriptures.  I. 

OH  Book !  infinite fwectnefle  let  my  heart ! 
Suck  ev'ry  letter,  and  a  hony  gain. 
Precious  for  any  grief  in  any  part ; 
To  cleare  the  breaft,  to  mollifie  all  pain. 

Thou  art  all  health,  health  thriving,  till  it  make 
A  full  eternitie:  thou  art  a  mafle 
Of  ftrange  delights.where  we  may  wifti  &  take. 

Ladies,  look  here  j  this  is  the  thankfuU  glafse. 

That  mends  the  lookers  eyes:  this  is  the  well 

That  wafhes  what  it  (hows.  Who  can  indeare 
Thy  praife  too  much?  thou  art  heav'ns  Lidger 

Working  againft  the  ftates  of  death  and  hell.      ( here. 

Thou  art  joyes  handfelhheav'n  lies flatin  thee, 
Subjedl  to  ev'ry  mounters  bended  knee. 


II. 

OH  that  I  knew  how  all  thy  lights  combine. 
And  the  configurations  of  their  glorie! 
Seeing  not  onely  how  each  verfe  doth  (hine. 
But  all  the  conllellations  of  the  llorie. 

This  verfe  marks  that,  and  both  do  make  a  motion 
Unto  a  third,  that  ten  leaves  off  doth  lie: 
Then  as  difperfed  herbs  do  watch  a  potion, 

Thefe  three  make  up  fome  Chriftians  delUnie 

Such 


The  Church.  51 

Such  are  thy  fecrets,  which  my  life  makes  good. 
And  comments  on  thee:  for  in  ev'ry  thing 
Thy  words  do  finde  me  out,  &  parallels  bring, 

And  in  another  make  me  underftood. 

Starres  are  poore  books,&  oftentimes  do  mifse: 
This  book  of  ftarres  lights  to  eternall  blifie. 


^   Whitfunday. 

LIften  fweet  Dove  unto  my  fong. 
And  fpread  thy  golden  wings  in  me; 
Hatching  my  tender  heart  fo  long. 
Till  it  get  wing,  and  flie  away  with  thee. 

Where  is  that  fire  which  once  defcended 
On  thy  Apoftles?  thou  didft  then 
Keep  open  houfe ,  richly  attended, 
Feafting  all  comers  by  twelve  chofen  men. 

Such  glorious  gifts  thou  didft  beftow. 
That  th'  earth  did  like  a  heav'n  appeare ; 
The  ftarres  were  coming  down  to  know 
If  they  might  mend  their  wages,  and  ferve  here. 

The  funne,which  once  did  fhinc  alone, 
Hung  down  his  head,  and  wilht  for  night, 
When  he  beheld  twelve  funnes  for  one 
Going  about  the  world,  and  giving  light. 

But  fince  thofe  pipes  of  gold,  which  brovght 
That  cordiall  water  to  our  ground, 
Were  cut  and  martyr'd  by  the  fault 
Of  thofc,w  ho  did  thexafelvcs  through  theirfide  wound 

C  2  Thou 


$2  T&e  Church. 

Thou  fhutt'ft  the  doore.and  keep'ft  within ; 
Scarce  a  good  joy  creeps  through  the  chink: 
And  if  the  braves  of  conqu'ring  finne 
Did  not  excite  thee,  we  (hould  wholly  fink. 

Lord.though  we  change,thou  art  the  fame; 
The  fame  fweet  God  of  love  and  light: 
Rertore  this  day,  for  thy  great  name, 
Unto  his  ancient  and  miraculous  right. 


^    Grace. 

MY  ftockliesdead,  andnoincreafe 
Doth  my  dull  husbandrie  improve: 
O  let  thy  graces  without  ceafe 

Drop  from  above! 

If  (till  the  funne  (hould  hide  his  face. 
Thy  houfe  would  but  a  dungeon  prove. 
Thy  works  nights  captives :  O  let  grace 
Drop  from  above ! 

The  dew  doth  ev'ry  morning  fall; 
And  (hall  the  dew  out- drip  thy  dove? 
The  dew.for  which  gra(re  cannot  call, 

Drop  from  above. 

Death  is  (till  working  like  a  mole. 
And  digs  my  grave  at  each  remove: 
Let  grace  work  too,  and  on  my  foul 

Drop  from  above. 

rSinne  is  (lill  hammering  my  heart 
I  U  oto  a  hardnelTe,  void  of  love: 
ll^tx  fopplinggrace,  to  ^roHejiis  art, 

Drop  from  above. 


The  Church.  53 

0  come !  for  thou  doll  know  the  way. 
'  Or  if  to  me  thou  wilt  not  move, 

Remove  me,  where  I  need  not  fay. 

Drop  from  above. 

\    Praife. 

To  write  a  verfe  or  two.is  all  the  praife, 
That  I  can  raife: 
Mend  my  eftate  in  any  wayes, 

Thou  (halt  have  more. 

1  go  to  Church;  help  me  to  wings,  and  I 

Will  thither  flie; 
Or,if  I  mount  unto  the  sloe, 
I  will  do  more. 

Man  is  all  weakneflej  there  is  no  fuch  thing 
As  Prince  or  King: 
Hisarmisfhort;  yet  with  a  fling 
He  may  do  more. 

An  herb  deftiird,and  drunlc,may  dwell  next  doore. 
On  the  fame  floore, 
To  a  brave  foul:  Exalt  the  poore. 
They  can  do  more, 

O  raife  me  then!  poore  bees,  that  work  all  day. 
Sting  my  delay. 
Who  have  a  work,  as  well  as  they, 
And  much,much  more. 

IT    Affliction. 

Ia.111  me  not  ev'ry  day. 
Thou  Lord  of  life  ;  fince  thy  one  death  for  me 
Is  more  then  all  my  deaths  can  be. 
Though  I  in  broken  pay 
Die  over  each  houre  of  Methufalems  ftay. 

C3  W 


54  T^he  Church. 

If  all  mens  tears  were  let 
Into  OBC  cxitnmon  fewer  ,  fea,  and  brine; 

What  were  they  all,  compar'd  to  thine? 
Wherein  if  they  were  fet. 
They  would  difcolour  thy  moft  bloudy  fweat. 

Thou  art  my  grief  alone. 
Thou  Lord  conceal  it  not:  and  as  thou  art 
All  my  delight,  fo  all  my  fmart: 

Thy  crofle  took  up  in  one. 
By  way  of  imprell,  all  my  future  mone. 


%  Mattens, 
T 

X.  Cannot  ope  mme  eyci. 
But  thou  art  ready  there  to  catch 
My  morning-foul  and  facrifice: 
Then  we  muft  needs  for  that  day  make  a  match. 

My  God,  what  is  a  heart? 
Silver,or  gold,  or  precious  ftone. 
Or  ftarre,  or  rainbow,  or  a  part 
Of  all  thefe  things,  or  all  of  them  in  one? 

My  God,  what  is  a  heart, 
That  thou  fliouldft  it  fo  eye,  and  wooe, 
Powringupon  it  all  thy  art. 
As  if  that  thou  hadft  nothing  els  to  do? 

Indeed  mans  whole  eftate 
Amounts  (and  richly)  to  ferve  thee: 
He  did  not  heav'n  and  earth  create, 
Vet  ftudies  them,  not  him  by  whom  they  be. 

Teach  me  thy  love  to  know; 
That  this  new  light,which  now  I  fee, 
May  both  the  work  and  workman  Ihow: 
Then  by  a  funnc-beam  I  will  climbe  to  thee. 

%  Sinne 


The  Church.  55 

T  Sinne. 

OThat  I  could  a  finne  once  fee! 
We  paint  the  devil  foul,  yet  he 
Hath  fome  good  in  him,all  agree. 
Sianc  is  flat  oppofite  to  th'  Almighty,  feeing 
It  wants  the  good  of  tvr/«^,  and  ai  being. 

But  God  more  care  of  us  hath  had : 
If  apparitions  make  us  fad , 
By  fight  of  finne  we  fhould  grow  mad. 
Yet  asinfleepwe  fee  foul  death, and  live: 
So  devils  are  our  finnes  in  pcripeftive. 

iMtiiuin  ^i.^— — I— I— 

%   Even-fong. 

fjLeft  be  the  God  of  We, 
Who  gave  mecyes,andlight,  and  power  this  day. 
Both  to  be  bufie  ,  and  to  play. 
But  much  more  bleft  be  God  above, 

Who  gave  me  fight  alone. 
Which  to  himfelf  he  did  denic: 
For  when  he  fees  my  waies,  I  dy: 
But  I  have  got  hisfonne,  and  he  hath  none. 

What  have  I  brought  thee  home 
For  this  thy  love  ?  have  I  difcharg'd  the  debt. 
Which  this  daycs  favour  did  beget? 
I  ranne;but  all  I  brought,  vras  fome. 

Thy  diet,  care,and  coft 
Do  end  in  bubbles,  balls  of  windc; 
Of  winde  to  thee  whom  I  have  croft, 
But  balls  of  wilde-fire  to  my  troubled  minde. 

C4  Yet 


56 


The  Church. 


Yet  ftill  thou  goeft  on, 
And  now  with  darknefle  clofeft  wearie  eyes. 
Saying  to  man,  //  dotbfufict : 
Hesetforth  repo/e;jour  work  is  dtnt. 

Thus  in  thy  Ebony  box 
Thou  doll  inclofe  us,  till  the  day 
Put  our  amendment  in  our  way, 
And  give  new  wheels  to  our  diforder'd  docki. 

I  mufe,  which  (hows  more  love. 
The  day  or  night:  that  is  the  gale,  this  th'harbour; 
That  is  the  walk,  and  this  the  arbout ; 
Or  that  the  garden,  this  the  grove. 

My  God,  thou  art  all  love. 
Not  one  poore  minute  'fcapes  thy  breaft, 
But  brings  a  favour  from  above ; 
And  in  this  love,  more  then  in  bed,  I  reft. 


^  Church-monuments. 

WHile  that  my  foul  repairs  to  her  devotion. 
Here  I  intombe  my  flefh,  that  it  betimes 
May  take  acquaintance  of  this  heap  of  duft ; 
To  which  the  blaft  of  deaths  inceffant  motion, 
Fed  with  the  exhalation  of  our  crimes. 
Drives  all  at  laft.  Therefore  I  gladly  truft 

My  bodie  to  this  fchool,  that  it  may  learn 
TQg-ljgellhis  elements,  and  finde  his  birth 
XSSTtgn '"  tiuS'g'hcraldrie  andjjnes; 
WhioTHnibtutron  lure  doth  Beft  difccrn. 
Comparing  duft  with  duft,  and  earth  with  earth. 
Thcfe  laugh  at  leat,  and  Marble  put  for  fignct, 

T» 


i:he  Church.  si 

lloSiever^the  good  feJloaJhip  of  duft, 
And  Tpoil  the  meeting.  What  fhall  point  out  them. 
When  they  fliall  bow,  and  kneel,  and  fall  down  flat 
To  kifle  thofe  heaps,  which  now  they  have  in  truft? 
Deare  flefli,  while  I  do  pray,  learn  here  thy  ftemmc 
And  true  defcent;  that  when  thou  fhalt  grow  fat, 

And  wanton  in  thy  cravings,  thou  mayft  know,   j^^,^^ 

That  fle(h  is  but  the<0aITeAwhich  holds  the  duft  -d.,.r  ^  <»*tv  -  \A*a,>j: 

That  meafures  all  our  time;  REg^alfo  (hall-q't"  ••♦— *itw.  '-»«.»*»>« 

Be  crumbled  into  duft.   Mark  here  below  d^  W^  *r  f-"*-^'' 

How  tame  thefe  alhes  arc,  how  free  trolriluft. 

That  thou  mayftfit  thy  felfagainft  thy  fall. 

%    Church-mufick. 

SWeeteft  of  fweets,  I  thank  you:  when  difplcafurc 
Did  through  my  bodie  wound    y  minde. 
You  took  me  thence,  and  in  your  houfe  of  pleafurc 
A  daintie  lodging  me  affign'd. 

Now  I  in  you  without  a  bodie  move, 

Rifing  and  falling  with  your  wings : 
We  both  together  fweetly  live  and  love, 

Yet  fay  fometimes,  God  help  potre  Kings. 

Comfort, 'He  die;  for  if  you  pofte  from  me, 

Sure  I  ftiall  do  fo,  and  much  more: 
But  if  I  travell  in  your  companie, 

You  know  the  way  to  heavens  doore. 


%   Church-lock  and  key. 

Know  it  is  my  finne,  which  locks  thine  eares, 
Andbindes  thy  hands; 
Out-crying  my  requefts,  drowning  my  tears ; 
Or  elfe  the  chilnefle  of  my  faint  demands. 

C  5  But 


I 


58 


The  Church. 


BtM  %t  cold  hand«  «re  angric  with  the  fire. 

And  mend  it  dill; 
So  I  do  Uy  the  want  of  my  defire, 
Not  on  my  finnej,  or  coldneffe,  but  thy  will. 

Yet  lieare,  O  God,  onely  for  his  blouds  fafce 

Which  pleads  for  me: 
For  though  finncs  plead  too,  yet  like  ftones  they  mike 
Hii  bloudj  fwcxt  current  much  more  loud  to  be. 


M 


H   The  Church-floore. 

Ark  you  the  floore^hat  fquare  &  fpeekled  ftone. 
Which  looks  io  firm  and  ftrong. 
Is  Patience  : 

And  th'other  black  and  grave,  wherewith  each  one 
\i  checker'd  all  along, 

Humilitie: 

The  gentle  rifing,  which  on  cither  hand 

Lead*  to  the  Q^ire  abore, 
h  Cenfidenee: 

B«t  tbe  Tweet  cement ,  which  in  one  fure  band 
Tiea  the  whole  frame,  is  Ltvt 
Atid  CbaritU. 

Hither  fomctimcs  Sinne  fteaU,  and  ftains 
The  marbles  neat  and  curious  veins : 

B«t  all  u  dcanfed  when  the  marble  weeps. 

Sometimes  Death  ,  puffing  at  the  doore, ' 
Blows  all  the  duft  about  the  floore. 

But  while  he  thinks  to  fpoil  the  room,  he  fweep*. 
Blcft  be  the  Arcbiiea,  whole  art 
Could  bu  iUlb  ftrong  in  a  weak  heart. 

f   The 


The  Church.  59 

%     The  Windows. 

LOrd,  how  can  man  preach  thy  ciernall  word  ? 
He  is  a  brittle  crazie  giaHe: 
Yet  in  thy  temple  thou  doft  him  afford 

This  glorious  and  tranfcendcnt  place, 
To  he  a  window,  through  thy  grace. 

(l^^heothou  doft  anneal  in  giafle  thy  ftorie. 

Making  thy  life  to  Okine  within 
The  holy  Preachers ;  then  the  light  and  {^lorie 

More  rev'rend  grows,  it  more  doth  win 
Which  clfe  (hows  watriih,blcak,  k  thin 

Dodrine  and  life,  col  ours  and  light/jp  one, 

When  they  combine  and  mingle ,  bring 

A  llrong  regard  and  aw:  but  fpeech  alone 

Doth  vanifh  like  a  flaring  thing. 
And  in  the  eare,  not  coniicience  ring. 


^   Trinitie  Sunday. 

LOrd,  who  haft  form'd  me  out  of  mud. 
And  haft  redeem'd  me  through  thy  bloud. 
And  fanflifi'd  me  to  do  good  ; 

Purge  all  my  finnes  done  heretofore: 
For  I  confefle  my  heavie  fcore. 
And  I  will  ftrive  to  finne  no  more 

Enrich  my  heart,  mouth,  hands  in  me  , 

With  faith,  with  hope,  with  charitie; 
That  I  may  runoe,  rii'e,  reft  with  thee. 


%  Con- 


6o  The  Church. 

f  Content. 

PEacemutt'ringthoughts,and  do  not  grudge  to  keep 
Within  the  walls  of  your  own  bread: 
Who  cannot  on  his  own  bed  fweetly  fleep, 
Can  on  anotheis  hardly  reft. 

Gad  not  abroad  at  ev'ry  queft  and  call 

Of  an  untrained  hope  or  paiEon. 

To  court  each  place  or  fortune  that  doth  fall, 
Is  wantonneiTe  in  contemplation. 

Mark  how  the  fire  in  flints  doth  quiet  lie. 

Content  and  warm  t'it  felf  alone: 
But  when  it  would  appeare  to  others  eye. 
Without  a  knock  it  never  Ihone. 

Give  me  the  pliant  minde,  whofe  gentle  meafure 
Complies  and  fuits  with  all  eftates  ; 

Which  can  let  loofe  to  a  crown,  and  yet  with  pleafure 
Take  up  within  a  cloifters  gates. 

This  foul  doth  fpan  the  world,  and  hang  content 
From  either  pole  unto  the  centre : 

Where  in  each  room  of  the  well-furniftit  tent 

He  lies  warm,  and  without  adventure. 

The  brags  of  life  are  but  a  nine  dayes  wonder ; 

And  after  death  the  fumes  that  fpring 
From  private  bodies,  make  as  big  a  thunder. 

As  thofe  which  rife  from  a  huge  King. 

Onely  thy  Chronicle  is  loft;  and  yet 

Better  by  worms  be  all  once  fpent , 

Then  to  have  hellifh  moths  ftill  gnaw  and  fret 

Thy  name  in  books,  which  may  not  rent : 

Whea 


T:he  Church.  6i 

When  all  thy  deeds,  whofe  brunt  thou  fcel'ft  alone. 

Are  chawM  by  others  pens  and  tongue; 
And  as  their  wit  is,  their  digellion. 

Thy  nouri(ht  fame  is  weak  or  ftrong. 

Then  ceafe  difcourfing  foul,  till  thine  own  ground, 
Do  not  thy  fclf  or  friends  importune. 

He  that  by  feeking  hath  himfelf  once  found , 
Hath  euer  found  a  happie  fortune. 

^   The  Quidditie. 

MY  God,  a  verfe  is  not  a  crown. 
No  point  of  honour,  or  gay  fuit. 
No  hawk,  or  banquet,  or  renown, 
Nora  good  fword,  nor  yet  a  lute : 

It  cannot  vault,  or  dance,  or  play; 
It  never  was  in  France  or  Spain; 
Nor  can  it  entertain  the  day 
With  a  great  liable  or  demain: 

It  is  no  office,  art,  or  news, 
Nor  the  Exchange,  or  bufie  Hall; 
But  it  is  that  which  while  I  ul'e 
I  am  with  thee.and  Mojl  take  all. 


I 


S   Humilitie. 

Saw  the  Vertues  fitting  hand  in  hand 
—  In  fev'rall  ranks  upon  an  azure  throne. 
Where  all  the  beads  and  fowls  by  their  command 
Prefented  tokens  of  lubmiflion. 
Humilitie,  who  fat  the  loweft  there 

To  execute  their  call. 
When  by  the  beafts  the  prefents  tendred  were , 

Gave  them  about  to  all. 

The 


I 


62  Ibe  Church. 

The  augrie  Lion  did  prefcnt  his  paw. 
Which  by  confent  was  giv'n  to  Manfuetude. 
Tlie  fearful!  Hare  her  eares,  which  by  their  Uw 
Humilitiedid  reach  to  Fortitude. 
The  jealous  Turltie  brought  his  corall-chain; 

That  went  to  Temperance. 
On  Juftice  was  beftow'd  the  Foxes  brain, 

Kill'd  in  the  way  by  chance. 

At  length  the  Crow  bringing  the  Peacocks  plume, 
(  For  he  would  not  )  as  they  beheld  the  grace 
Of  that  brave  gift, each  one  began  to  fume, 
And  challenge  it,  as  proper  to  his  place. 
Till  they  fell  out:  which  when  the  beaftj  efpted. 

They  leapt  upon  the  throne; 
And  if  the  Fox  had  liv'd  to  rule  their  fide. 

They  had  depos'd  each  one. 

Humilitie,  who  held  the  plume,  at  this 

Did  weep  fo  faft,  that  the  tear*  tricltlingdown 

SpoiI'd  ail  the  train :  then  laying,  Here  it  is 

Fer  witch  ye  wrangle,  made  them  turn  their  frown 

Againft  the  beafls:  lo  joynlly  bandying. 

They  drive  them  foon  away; 
And  then  amerc'd  them,  double  gifts  to  bring 

At  the  next  SefTion-day. 


L 


%  Frailtie. 

Ord,  in  my  (ilence  how  do  I  defpife 

p  What  upon  truft 

Is  ftyled  honour,  riches,  or  fair  eyes; 

But  \%fair  duj{\ 
I  furname  them  guiUed  clay, 
lieare  earth,  fine graffe  or  bay. 
In  all,  I  think  my  foot  doth  ever  tread 

U  pon  their  head. 


The  Church.  63 

But  when  I  view  abroad  both  Rf  giments; 

The  worlds, and  thine: 
Thine  clad  with  fimplenelTe,  and  fad  events; 
The  other  fine. 
Full  of  glorie  and  gay  weeds, 
Brave  language,  braver  deei's: 
That  which  was  dull  before ,  doth  quickly  rife. 
And  prick  mine  eyes. 

O  brook  not  this, left  if  what  even  now 

My  foot  did  tread. 
Affront  thofe joyes,  wherewith  tnou  didft endow. 
And  long  Hnce  wed 
My  poore  foul,  ev'n  fick  of  love; 
It  may  a  Babel  prove 
Commodious  to  conquer  heav'n  and  thee 
Planted  in  me. 


^  Conftancle. 

W  Ho  is  the  honeft  manf 
He  that  doth  ftjll  and  ftrongly  good  purfue. 
To  God,  his  neighbour,  and  himfeif  moft  true; 

Whom  neither  force  nor  fawning  can 
Unpinne,or  wrench  from  giving  all  their  due. 

Whofe  hone ftie  is  not 
So  loofe  or  eafic,  that  a  ruffling  winde 
Can  blow  away,  or  glittering  look  it  blinder 

Who  rides  his  fure  and  even  trot. 
While  tJie  world  now  rides  by,  now  lags  bchinde. 


Wh« 


64  7i>^  Church. 

Who,  when  great  trials  come, 
Norfeeks,  norfViunnes  them;  but  doth  calmly  ftay, 
Till  he  the  thing  and  the  example  weigh: 

All  being  brought  into  a  fummu, 
What  place  or  perfon  calls  for,  he  doth  pay. 

Whom  none  can  work  or  wooe 
To  ufe  in  any  thing  a  trick  or  fleight; 
For  above  all  things  he  abhorres  deceit: 

His  words  and  works  and  fafliion  too 
All  of  a  piece,  and  all  arc  cleare  and  ftraight. 

Who  never  melts  or  thaws 
At  clofe  tentations:  when  the  day  is  done. 
His  goodneffe  fets  not,  but  in  dark  can  runnc: 

The  funne  to  others  writeth  laws, 
And  is  their  vertue;  Vertue  is  his  Sunne. 

Who,  when  he  is  to  treat 
With fick  folks,  women,  thofe  whom  paffionsfvvay, 
Allows  for  that,and  keeps  his  conftant  way: 
Whom  others  faults  do  not  defeat ; 
But  though  men  fail  him,  yet  his  part  doth  play. 

Whom  nothing  can  procure, 
When  the  wide  world  runnes  bias,  from  his  will 
To  writhe  his  limbes,  and  (hare,  not  mend  the  ill. 

This  is  the  Mark-man,  fafe  and  fure. 
Who  ftill  is  right,  and  prayes  to  be  fo  ftill. 


^  Affliaion. 

My  heart  did  heave,  and  there  came  forth,  O  G«d\ 
By  that  I  knew  that  thou  waft  in  the  grief, 
To  guide  and  govern  it  to  my  relief. 
Making  a  fcepter  of  the  rod: 
Hadft  thou  not  had  thy  part, 
Sure  the  unruly  figh  had  broke  my  heart. 


The  Church.  65 

But  fince  thy  breath  gave  me  both  life  and  (hape, 
Thou  knowft  my  tallies;  and  when  there's  afCgn'i 
So  much  breath  to  a  figh,  what's  then  behinde? 
Or  if  fome  yeares  with  it  efcape. 
The  figh  then  onely  is 
A  gale  to  bring  me  fooner  to  my  bliflc. 

Thy  life  on  earth  was  grief,  and  thou  art  ftill 
Conftant  unto  it,  making  it  to  be 
A  point  of  honour,  now  to  grieve  in  me. 
And  in  thy  members  fuffer  ill. 
They  who  lament  one  croiTe, 
Thou  dying  dayly,  praife  thee  to  thy  loffe. 


B 


J  The  Starre. 

Right  fpark,  (hot  from  a  brighter  place, 
Where  beams  furround  my  Saviours  face, 
Canil  thou  be  any  where 
So  well  as  there? 


i 


Yet,  if  thou  wilt  from  thence  depart, 
Take  a  bad  lodging  in  my  heart; 

For  thou  canft  make  a  debter, 
And  make  it  better. 

Firftwith  thy  fire- work  burn  to  dull 
Folly,  and  worfe  then  folly,  luft: 
Then  with  thy  light  refine. 
And  make  it  fhine: 

So  difengag'd  from  finne  and  ficknefle, 
Touchit  with  thyceleftiall  quickneflc. 
That  it  may  hang  and  move 
After  thy  love. 


Tken 


66  The  Church. 

Then  with  our  trinitie  of  light, 

Motion,  and  heat,  let's  take  oar  flight 
unto  the  place  where  thou 
Before  didft  bow. 

Get  me  a  flanding  there,  and  place 

Among  the  beams,  which  crown  the  face 
Of  him,  who  dy'd  to  part 
Sinnc  and  my  heart: 

That  fo  among  the  reft  I  may 

Glitter,  and  curie,  and  winde  as  they: 
That  winding  is  their  fafhion 
Of  adoration. 

Sure  thou  wilt  joy,  by  gaining  me 
To  flic  home  lite  a  laden  bee 
I)  nto  that  hive  of  beams 
And  garknd-lheams. 


^  Sunday. 


o 


'  Day  moft  calm,  mofl  bright, 
The  fruit  of  this,  the  next  worlds  bud, 
Th'  indorfement  of  fupreme  delight. 
Writ  bya  friend,and  with  his  bloud; 
The  couch  of  time;  cares  balm  and  bay: 
The  week  were  dark,  but  for  thy  light: 
Thy  torch  doth  fhow  the  way. 


The 


'The  Church.  67 


The  other  dayes  and  thou 
Make  up  one  man;  wbofe  face  thou  art. 
Knocking  at  heaven  with  thy  brow: 
The  worky-daies  are  the  back-partj 
The  burden  of  the  week  lies  there. 
Making  the  whole  to  ftoup  and  bow. 

Till  thy  releafe  appeare. 

Man  had  ftraight  forward  gone 
To endlefle  death:  but  thou  doft  pull 
And  turn  us  round  to  look  on  one. 
Whom,  if  we  were  not  very  dull. 
We  could  not  choofe  but  look  on  ftill; 
Since  there  is  no  place  fo  alone, 

The  which  he  dothnot  fill. 


Sundates  the  pillars  are, 
On  which  heav'ns palace  archedlies: 
The  other  dayes  fill  up  the  fparc 
And  hollow  room  with  vanities. 
They  ire  the  fruitfull  beds  and  borders 
In  Grodt  rich  garden',  that  is  bare. 

Which  parts  their  ranks  and  orders. 

The  Sundaies  of  mans  life, 
Th redded  together  on  times  firing. 
Make  bracelets  to  adorn  the  wife 
Of  the  eternall  glorious  King. 
On  Sunday  heavens  gate  ftands  ope; 
Blefiings  are  plentiful!  and  rife, 

Moreplentifull  then  hope. 


Thb 


68  The  ChurcH. 

This  day  my  Saviour  rofe. 
And  did  inclofe  this  light  for  his: 
That,  as  each  beaft  his  manger  knows, 
Man  might  not  of  his  fodder  mifse. 
Chrift  hath  took  in  this  piece  of  ground, 
And  made  a  garden  there  for  thofe 

Who  want  herbs  for  their  wound. 


The  reft  of  our  Creation 
Our  great  Redeemer  did  remove 
With  the  fame  (hake,  which  at  his  paffion 
Did  th'  earth  and  all  things  with  it  move. 
A«  Samfon  bore  the  doores  away, 
Chrifts  hands,  though  nail'd,  wrought  our  {alvation, 

And  did  unhinge  that  day. 

The  brightnefse  of  that  day 
We  fuUied  by  our  foul  offence: 
Wherefore  that  robe  we  caft  away, 
Having  a  new  at  his  expence, 
Whofe  drops  of  bloud  paid  the  full  price. 
That  was  requir'd  to  make  us  gay, 

And  fit  for  Paradife. 

Thou  art  a  day  of  mirth: 
And  where  the  week-dayes  trail  on  ground. 
Thy  flight  is  higher,  as  thy  birth. 
O  let  me  take  thee  at  the  bound. 
Leaping  with  thee  from  fev'n  to  fev'n. 
Till  that  we  both,  being  tofs'd  from  earth, 

Flie  hand  in  hand  to  heav'o! 

T  Avarice. 


the  Church.  69 

T  Avarice. 

MOney,thoubaneofbliire,&  fourfeofwo,  (fine? 
Whence  com'ft  thou,that  thou  artfo  frefii  and 
I  know  thy  parentage  is  baie  and  low : 
Man  found  thee  poore  and  dirtie  in  a  mine. 

Surely  thou  didft  io  little  contribute 

To  this  great  kingdome,  which  thou  now  haft  got. 
That  he  was  fain,  when  thou  wert  deftitutc. 

To  digge  thee  out  of  thy  dark  cave  and  grot: 

Then  forcing  thee,  by  fire  he  made  thee  bright: 
Nay, thou  haft  got  the  face  of  man;  for  we 
Have  with  our  ftamp  and  feal  transferr'd  our  right: 

TboQ  art  the  man,  and  man  but  drofte  to  thee. 

Man  calleth  thee  his  wealth,  who  made  thee  rich; 
And  while  he  digs  out  thee,  falls  in  the  ditch. 


H 


.       C   Mary    ) 
^"'X    Army    \s'""- 

Ow  well  her  name  an  Army  doth  prefent, 
In  whom  the  Lord  of  bofts  did  pitch  his  teat! 


To  all  Angels  and  Saints. 

OH  glorious  fpirits,who after  all  your  bands 
See  the  fmooth  face  of  God,  without  a  frown 
Or  ftri£t  command*; 
Where  ev'ry  one  is  king,  and  hath  his  crown, 
ff  IOC  npon  hi*  bead ,  yet  in  his  band*: 

Not 


I 


JO  The  Church. 

Not  out  of  envic  or  malicioufneffe 
Do  I  forbear  to  crave  your  fpeciall  aid: 
I  would  addreflc 
My  vows  to  thee  moll  gladly,  blefled  Maid, 
And  Mother  of  my  God,in  my  diftreffe. 

Thou  art  the  holy  mine,  whence  came  the  gold, 
The  great  reftorative  for  all  decay 

In  young  and  old; 
Thou  art  the  cabinet  where  the  Jewell  lay: 
Chiefly  to  thee  would  I  my  foul  unfold: 

But  now  (alas! )  I  dare  not;  for  our  King, 
Whom  we  do  all  joyntly  adore  and  praife. 

Bids  no  fuch  thing: 
And  where  his  pleafureno  injunftionlayes, 
(  'Tis  your  own  cafe)  ye  never  move  a  wing. 

All  worftiip  is  prerogative,  and  a  flower 

Of  his  rich  crown,lrora  whom  lyes  no  appeal 

At  the  laft  houre: 
Therefore  we  dare  not  from  his  garland  fteal, 
To  make  a  pofie  for  inferiour  power. 

Although  then  others  court  you,  if  ye  know 
What's  done  on  earth,  we  (hall  not  fare  the  woifc, 

Who  do  not  fo; 
Since  we  are  ever  ready  to  disburfe, 
Jf  any  one  our  Matters  hand  can  ihow. 


1  Employment. 

HE  that  is  weary, let  him  fit. 
My  foul  would  ftirre 
And  trade  incourtefies  and  wit. 

Quitting  the  furre 
To  coM  complexions  needing  it.  Man 


7^ 


The  Church. 

Man  is  noftarre,buc  a  quick  coal 
Of  mortall  fire: 

Who  blows  it  not,  nor  doth  control! 
A  faint  defire, 

Let*  his  own  afhes  choke  his  foul. 

When  th'  elements  did  for  place  conteft     ' 
With  him,  whofe  will 

Ordain'd  the  higheft  to  be  beil; 

The  earth  fat  ftill. 

And  by  the  others  is  oppreft. 

Life  is  a  bufineffe,  not  good  cheer; 

Ever  in  warres. 
The  funne  ftill  (hineth  there  or  here. 

Whereas  the  ftarres 
Watch  an  advantage  to  appearc. 

Oh  that  I  were  an  Orenge-tree, 

That  bufie  plant! 

Then  fliould  I  ever  laden  be, 

And  never  want 

Some  fruit  for  him  that  drefled  me. 

But  we  are  ftill  too  young  or  old ; 

The  man  is  gone. 
Before  we  do  our  wares  unfold: 

So  we  freeze  on, 
Untill  the  grave  increafe  our  cold. 


1    Deniall. 

'y^Hen  my  devotions  could  not  pierce 
Thy  filent  eares; 
Then  was  my  heart  broken.as  was  my  verfe: 
My  breaft  was  full  of  fears 

Anddifordef:  My 


72  The  Church. 

My  bent  thoughts,  like  a  brittle  bow. 
Did  flie  afunder : 
Each  took  his  way;  fome  would  to  pleafures  go. 
Some  to  the  warres  and  thunder 
Of  alarms. 

As  good  go  any  where,  they  fay. 

As  tobenumme 
Both  knees  and  heart,  in  crying  night  and  day. 
Come,  eome,  my  God,  0  tome, 
But  no  hearing. 

O  that  thou  (houldft  give  dull  a  tongue 
Tc  crie  to  thee, 
And  then  not  heare  it  crying!  all  day  long 
My  heart  was  in  my  knee , 

But  no  hearing. 

Therefore  my  foul  lay  out  of  fight, 

Untun'd,  unftrung: 
My  feeble  fpirit .  unable  to  look  right, 
Like  a  nipt  bloflbrae.hung 
Difcontented. 

O  cheer  and  tune  my  heartleffc  breaft, 
Deferre  no  time; 
That  fo  thy  favours  granting  my  requeft. 
They  and  my  minde  may  chime. 
And  mend  my  ryme. 


f   Chriftmas. 

ALl  after  pleafures  as  I  rid  one  day, 
My  horfe  and  I,  both  tir'd,  bodie  and  minde. 
With  full  crie  of  afFeftions,  quite  aftray; 
I  took  up  in  the  next  inne  I  could  finde. 

Tbtre 


The  Church.  73 

There  when  I  came,  whom  found  I  but  my  dearc, 
My  deareft  Lord,  expcfting  till  tl^e  grief 
Ofpleafures  brought  me  to  him,  readie  there 

To  be  all  paffengers  moll  fweet  relief? 

0  Thou,  whofe  glorious,  yetcontrafled  light, 

Wrapt  in  nights  mantle,  ftole  into  a  manger; 
Since  my  dark  foul  and  brutilh  is  thy  right, 
To  Man  of  all  beafts  be  not  thou  allranger:   • 

Furnilh  &  deck  my  foul,  that  thou  raayft  have 
A  better  lodging,  then  a  rack,  or  grave. 

THc  (hepherds  fing;  and  fliall  I  filent  be? 
My  God,  no  hymne  for  thee? 
My  foul's  a  fliepherd  too;  a  flock  it  feeds 

Of  thoughts,  and  words,  and  deedsl 
The  paftureis  thy  word:  the ftreams.thy  grace 

Enriching  all  the  place. 
Shepherd  and  flock  (hall  fing,and  all  my  powers 

Out-fing  the  day-light  houres 
Then  we  willchidethe  funnefor  letting  night 

Take  up  his  place  and  right: 
We  fing  one  common  Lord;  wherefore  he  ftiould 

Himfelf  the  candle  hold. 

1  will  go  fearching,  till  I  findc  a  funne 

Shall  ilay,  till  we  have  done; 
A  willing  fliiner,  that  (hall  (hine  as  gladly, 

As  froil-nipt  funnes  look  fadly. 
Then  we  will  fing,  and  (hine  all  our  own  day, 

And  one  another  pay  : 
His  beams  (hall  cheer  my  breaft,  and  both  fo  twine, 
Tillcv'n  his  beams  fing,and  my  mufick  (hine. 

D  1  Un- 


74  ^be  Church. 

^  UngratefulnefTe. 

LOrd,  with  what  bountie  and  rare  clemencie 
Haft  thou  redeem'd  us  from  the  grave ! 

If  thou  hadft  let  us  runne. 
Gladly  had  man  ador'd  the  funne, 

And  thought  his  god  moft  brave; 
Where  now  we  (hall  be  better  gods  then  he. 

Thou  haft  but  two  rare  cabinets  full  of  treafurc. 
The  Trinitie,  and  Incarnation: 

Thou  haft  unlockt  them  both, 
And  made  them  jewels  to  betroth 
The  work  of  thy  creation 
Unto  thy  (elfin  everlafting  pleafure. 

The  ftatelier  cabinet  is  the  Trinilie, 

Whofe  fparkling light  accefle  denies: 

Therefore  thou  doft  not  fhow 
This  fully  to  us,  till  death  blow 
The  duft  into  our  eyes: 
For  by  that  powder  thou  wilt  make  us  fee. 

But  all  thy  fweets  are  packt  up  in  the  other; 

Thy  mercies  thither  flock  and  flow: 

That  as  the  firft  affrights, 
This  may  allure  us  with  delights; 
Becaufethis  box  we  know  ; 
For  we  have  all  of  us  juft  fuch  another. 

But  man  is  clofe,  referv'd,  and  dark  to  thee : 

When  thou  demandeft  but  a  heart. 

He  cavils  inftantly. 
In  his  poore  cabinet  of  bone 

Sinnes  have  their  box  apart, 
De.'rauding  thee,  who  gaveft  two  for  one, 

^  Sighs 


The  Church.  y^ 

^   Sighs  and  Grones. 

\J  Do  not  ufe  me 
After  my  finnes  !  look  not  on  my  defert. 
But  on  thy  glorie  !  then  thou  wilt  reform 
And  not  rcfufeme:  for  thou  onelyart 
The  mightie  God,  but  I  a  fillie  worm; 

O  do  not  bruife  me ! 

O  do  not  urge  me ! 
For  what  account  can  thy  ill  fteward  make  ? 
i  have  abus'd  thy  ftock,  deftroy'd  thy  woods, 
Suckt  all  thy  magazens:  my  head  did  ake. 
Till  it  found  out  how  to  confume  thy  goods : 

O  do  not  fcourge  me ! 

Odo  not  blinde  me! 
I  have  deferv'd  that  an  Egyptian  night 
Should  thicken  all  my  powers;  becaufe  my  luft 
Hath  ftill  fow'd  fig-leaves  to  exclude  thy  light: 
But  I  am  frailtie,and  already  dull; 

O  do  not  grinde  me ! 

O  do  not  fill  me 
With  the  turn'd  viall  of  thy  bitter  wrath  ! 
For  thou  hallother  veffels  full  of  bloud, 
A  part  whereof  my  Saviour  empti'd  hath, 
Ev'n  unto  death  ;  fince  he  di'd  for  my  good  , 
O  do  not  kill  me  I 

But  O  reprieve  me! 
For  thou  haft  life  and  death  at  thy  command; 
Tiiou  art  both  Judge  a.xii  Saviour,  feajl  3.nd  red, 
CordiallzxA  Corrofive:  put  not  thy  hand 
Into  the  bitter  box;  but  O  my  God, 

My  God,  relieve  me! 

D  2  f  The 


76  The  Church. 

f  The  World. 

LOve  built  a  (lately  houfe;  where  Fortunt  came. 
And  fpinning  phanfies,  (he  was  heard  to  fay, 
That  her  fine  cobwebs  did  fupport  the  frame, 
Whereas  they  were  fupported  by  the  fame: 
But  flf't/JftfCT*  quickly  fwept  them  all  away. 


Then  Pleafureamt,  who  liking  not  the  fafhion. 
Began  to  make  Balconet,  Terrace!^ 
Till  Ihe  had  weakned  all  by  alteration: 
But  rev'rend  latus,  and  many  Sl  proclamation 
Reformed  all  at  length  with  menaces. 


Then  enter'd  Sinne,  and  with  that  Sycomore, 
Whofe  leaves  firft  (heltred  man  from  drought  &  dew. 
Working  and  winding  flily  evermore, 
Ttie  inward  walls  and  Sommers  cleft  and  tore; 
But  Grate  ftior'd  thefe,  and  cut  that  as  it  grew. 


Then  Sinne  combin'd  with  "Death  in  a  firm  band 
To  rafc  the  building  to  the  very  floore : 
Which  they  effefled,  none  could  them  withftand 
But  Love  and  Grace  took  Glorie  by  the  hand. 
And  built  a  braver  Palace  then  before. 


Colofl. 


The  Church.  'jj 

Colofl.    3.  3. 
Our  life  ts  hid  with  Chrifl  in  God. 


y[\ 


r  2^  words  &  thoughts  do  both  exprefle  this  notion, 
'  That  Life  hath  with  the  fun  a  double  motion. 
The     firft     /j  ftraight,  and  our  diurnall  friend. 
The    other       Hid ,  and  doth  obliquely  bend. 
One   life    is  wrapt    /«  flelh ,  and  tends  to  earth. 
The  other  winds  towards  Him,who(e  happie  birth 
Taught  mc  to  live  here  fo  ,   Tiat  ftili  one  eye 
Should  aim  and  (hoot  at  that  which  Js  on  high: 
Quitting     with    daily    labour     all      My  pieafure  , 
To     gain     at     harveft     an,    eternall      Trcajurt. 


^    Vanitie. 

X  He  fleet  Aftronomer  can  bore, 
And  thrcd  the  fpheres  with  his  quick-piercing  minde : 
He  views  their  ftations,  walks  from  doore  to  doore, 

Surveys,  as  if  he  had  defign'd 
To  make  a  purchafe  there:  he  fees  their  dances. 

And  knoweth  long  before. 
Both  their  ftill-ey'd  afpeih,  and  fecret  glances. 

The  nimble  Diver  with  his  fide 
Cuts  through  the  working  waves,  that  he  may  fetch 
His  dearely-earned  pearl,  which  God  did  hide 

On  purpofe  from  the  ventrous  wretch; 
T  hat  he  might  fave  his  life,  and  alfo  hers, 

Who  with  exceffive  pride 
Her  own  deftruflion  and  his  danger  wears. 

D3  The 


78 


The  Church. 


The  fubtilChymick  can  deveft 
And  ftiip  the  creature  naked,  till  he  findc 
The  callow  principles  within  their  neft: 

There  he  imparts  to  them  his  minde, 
Admitted  to  their  bed-chamber,  before 

They  appeare  trim  and  drett 
To  ordinarie  fuitours  at  the  doore. 

What  hath  not  man  fought  out  and  found , 
But  his  deare  God?  who  yet  his  glorious  law 
Embofomes  in  us,  mellowing  the  ground 

With  (howres  and  frofts,  with  love  &  aw. 
So  that  we  need  not  fay,  Where's  this  command  f 

Poore  man,  thou  fearchell  round 
To  finde  out  death,  but  miffeft  life  at  hand . 


f  Lent. 

WElcome  deare  feaft  of  Lent:  who  loves  not  thee, 
He  loves  not  Temperance,  or  Authoritie , 
But  is  compos 'd  of  paffion. 
The  Scriptures  bid  \i%fafi;  the  Church  fayes,  new : 
Gire  to  thy  Mother.what  thou  wouWft  allow 
To  ev'ry  Corporation. 

The  humble  foul  compos'd  of  love  and  fear 
Begins  at  home,  and  layes  the  burden  there. 

When  dodlrines  difagree. 
He  (ayes.in  things  which  ufehath  juftly  got, 
I  am  a  fcandall  to  the  Church,  and  not 

The  Church  is  fo  to  me. 

True 


The  Church.  79 

True  Chriftians  (hould  be  glad  erf"  an  occafioti 
To  ufe  their  temperance.i'eeking  no  evafiion. 

When  good  is  feafonable; 
Unlefie  Authoritie.which  fliould  increafe 
The  obligation  in  us  ,make  it  lefle. 

And  Power  it  felfdifable. 

Befides  the  cleanneffe  of  fweet  abftinence. 
Quick  thoughts  and  motions  at  a  fmall  expenfe, 

A  face  not  fearing  light: 
Whereas  in  fulnefle  there  are  fliittifh  fumes, 
Sovrre  exhalations,  and  difhoneil  rheumes, 

Revenging  the  delight. 

Then  thofe  fame  pendant  profits,  which  the  fprjng 
And  Eafter  intimate,  enlarge  the  thing, 

And  goodnefTe  of  the  deed. 
Neither  ought  other  mensabufe  of  Lent 
Spoil  the  good  ufe;  left  by  that  argument 

We  forfeit  all  our  Creed. 

It's  true,  we  cannot  reach  Chrifts  forti'th  dayj 
Yet  to  go  part  of  that  religious  way, 

Is  better  then  to  reft: 
We  cannot  reach  our  Saviours  puritie; 
Yet  are  we  bid,  Be  holy  et/n  a:  be. 

In  both  let's  do  our  beft. 

Who  goeth  in  the  way  which  Chrift  hath  gone, 
Is  much  more  fure  to  meet  with  him,  then  one 

That  travelleth  by-wayes: 
Perhaps  my  God,  though  he  be  farre  befbrej 
May  turn,  and  take  me  by  the  hand,  and  more 

May  ftrengthcn  my  decayes. 

D  4  Yet 


8o  The  Church. 

Yer  Lord  inftruft  us  to  improve  our  fail 
By  ftarvingfinneand  taking  fuch  repaft. 

As  may  our  faults  control): 
Thatev'ry  man  may  revell  at  his  doore, 
Not  in  his  parlour;  banquetting  the  poore. 

And  dmong  thofe his  foul. 


IF  Vertue. 

SWeet  day,fo  cool,  fo  calm,  fo  bright, 
The  bridall  of  the  earth  and  skie: 
The  dew  fliall  weep  thy  fall  to  night; 
For  thou  muii  die. 

Sweet  rofe,  whofe  hue  angrie  and  brave 
Bids  the  rafli  gazer  wipe  his  eye: 
Thy  root  is  ever  in  its  grave. 

And  thou  mud  die. 

Sweet  fpring,  full  of  fweet  dayes  and  rofes, 
A  box  where  fweets  compared  lie; 
My  mufick  Ihows  ye  have  your  clofes. 
And  all  mull  die. 

Onely  a  fweet  and  vertuous  foul. 
Like  fcafon'd  timber,  never  gives; 
But  though  the  whole  world  turn  to  coal, 
Then  chiefly  live*. 


tThc 


rbe  Church.  81 

^  The  Pearl.  Matth.  1 3. 

I  Know  the  wayes  of  learning;  both  the  head 
And  pipes  that  feed  the  preffe,  and  make  it  rujice, 
What  realon  hath  from  nature  borrowed. 
Or  of  it  felf,  likeagoodhufwife,  fpunne 
In  laws  and  policie;  what  the  ftarres  confpirc. 
What  willing  nature  fpeaks,  what  forc'd  by  fire; 
Both  th'  old  dilcoveries,  and  the  new-found  fea«. 
The  Hock  and  furplus,  caufe  and  hiftorie; 
All  thefe  ftand  open,  or  1  have  the  keyes: 
Yet  I  love  thee. 

I  know  the  wayei  of  honour,  what  maintaiiu 
The  quick  returns  of  courtefie  and  wit: 
In  vies  of  favours  whether  partie  gains, 
When  glorie  fwells  the  heart,  and  moldeth  it 
To  all  expreffions  both  of  hand  and  eye. 
Which  on  the  world  a  true-love-knot  may  tie. 
And  bear  the  bundle,  wherefoe're  it  goes: 
How  many  drammes  of  fpirit  there  muft  be 
To  fell  my  life  unto  my  friends  or  foei: 
Yet  I  love  thee. 

I  know  the  wayes  of  pleafure,  the  fweet  ftraini. 
The  lullings  and  the  relifhes  of  it; 
The  propofitionsof  hot  bloud  and  brains; 
What  mirth  and  mufick  mean;  what  love  and  wit 
Have  done  thefe  twentie  hundred  yeares,  and  mort; 
I  know  the  projefis  of  unbridled  ftore: 
My  ftufFe  is  flefh,  not  braffc;  my  fenfes  live, 
And  grumble  oft,  that  they  have  more  in  me 
Then  he  that  curbs  them,  being  but  one  to  five 
Yet  I  love  thee. 

D  5  I 


82  Ihe  Church. 

I  know  all  thefe,  and  have  them  in  my  hand: 
Therefore  not  fealed,  but  with  open  eyes 
I  flie  to  thee,  and  fully  underftand 
Both  the  main  fale.  and  the  commodities; 
And  at  what  rate  and  price  I  have  thy  love; 
With  all  the  circumftances  that  may  move: 
Yet  through  the  labyrinths,  not  my  groveling  wit. 
But  thy  filk  twift  let  down  from  heav'n  to  me. 
Did  both  conduft  and  teach  me,  how  by  it 
Toclimbetothee. 


^  Affliaion. 

BRoken  in  pieces  all  afunder. 
Lord,  hunt  me  not, 
A  thing  forgot. 
Once  a  poore  creature,  now  a  wonder, 
A  wonder  tortur'd  in  the  fpace 
Betwixt  this  world  and  that  of  grace. 

My  thoughts  are  all  a  cafe  of  knives. 
Wounding  my  heart 
With  fcatter'd  fmart, 
As  watring  pots  give  flowers  their  lives. 
Nothing  their  furie  can  controU, 
While  they  do  wound  and  prick  my  foul. 

All  ray  attendants  are  at  ftrife. 

Quitting  their  place 
Unto  my  face: 
Nothing  performs  the  task  of  life: 

The  elements  are  let  loofe  to  fight, 
And  while  I  live,  trie  out  their  right. 


Oh 


The  Church.  83 

Oh  help,  my  God!  let  not  their  plot 
Kill  them  and  me. 
And  alio  thee. 
Who  art  my  life:  diflbl  ve  the  knot. 

As  the  funne  fcatters  by  his  light 
All  the  rebellions  of  the  night. 

Then  (hall  thofe  powers,  which  work  for  grief. 
Enter  thy  pay. 
And  day  by  day 
Labour  thy  praife,  and  my  relief; 

With  care  and  courage  building  me. 
Till  I  reach  heav'n,  and  much  more  thee 


<|y    Man. 

My  God,  I  heard  this  day,  . 
That  none  doth  build  a  ftately  habitation. 
But  he  that  means  to  dwell  therein. 
What  houfe  more  ftately  hath  there  been. 
Or  can  be,  then  is  Man?  to  whofe  creation 
All  things  are  in  decay. 

For  Man  is  ev'ry  thing. 

And  more:  He  is  a  tree,  yet  bears  no  fruit; 
A  beaft,  yet  is,  or  (hould  be  more: 
Reafon  and  fpeech  we  onely  bring. 

Parrats  may  thank  us,  if  they  are  not  mute. 
They  go  upon  the  fcorc. 

Man  is  all  fymmetrie. 
Full  of  proportions,  one  limbe  to  another. 
And  ail  to  all  the  world  befides: 
Each  part  may  call  the  fartheft,  brother: 
For  head  with  foot  hath  private  amitie. 

And  both  with  moons  and  tides. 

Nothiug 


84.  "The  Church. 

Nothing  hath  got  fo  farrc, 
Bm  M*"  *"'^''  ''aughtand  kept  it,  as  his  prey. 
Hii  eyesdidnount  the  highed  ffarrel" 
He  is  in  little  all  the  fphere. 
Herba  gladly  cure  our  flcfh;  bccauTe  that  they 
Finde  their  acquaintance  there. 

For  u$  the  winde*  do  blow, 
The  ctrth  doth  reA,  heav'n  move,  and  fountains  flow 
Nothing  we  fee,  but  means  our  good. 
As  cur  delight,  or  as  our  treafure: 
The  whole  is,  either  our  cupboard  of  fo»d. 
Or  cabinet  of  fUaJurt. 

The  ftarrc*  have  us  to  bed; 
Night  draw*  the  curtain,  which  the  funne  withdraws, 
Mufick  and  light  attend  our  head. 
All  things  unto  omfiejh  are  kinde 
In  their  dtjcent  and  beitig;  to  ou  r  mindt 
In  their  ajtent  and  cauft. 

Each  thing  is  full  of  dutic: 
W»ten  united  are  our  navigation; 

Diftinguilhed,  our  habitation; 
Below,  our  drink;  above,  our  meat ; 
Both  are  our  cleanlineflc.  Hath  one  fiich  beauticf 
Then  how  are  all  things  neat? 

More  fervants  wait  on  Man, 
Then  he'l  take  notice  of:  irievVypath 

He  treads  down  thaTwhich  doth  befriend  him, 
W  hen  fickDelfe  makes  him  palea1n3^van. 
Oh  tnightie  love!  Man  is  one  world,  and  hath 
Aoother  to  attend  him. 

Since 


T^be  Church.  85 

Since  then, my  God,thou  haft 
So  brave  a  Palace  built  ;  O  dwell  in  it, 

That  it  may  dwell  with  iheeatlaft! 
Till  then,affbrd  us  fo  much  wit  j 
Tl>at,ai  the  world  ferves  us, we  mayferve  thee. 

And  both  thy  fervants  be. 


%  Antlphon. 

Ci<»r.  TjRaifed  be  the  God  of  love, 
JL  Mtn.     Here  below. 

Angels.  And  here  above: 
Cbt.        Who  hath  dealt  his  mercies  fo, 
jing.   To  his  friend. 
Men.  And  to  his  ioc  ; 

Cht.        That  both  grace  and  glorie  tend 

Ang.    Us  of  old  , 

Men.   And  us  in  th'end. 
Cbn.        The  great  ftiepherd  of  the  fold 

Ang.   Us  did  make. 

Men.  For  us  was  fold. 

Cln.        He  our  foes  in  pieces  brake  ; 

Ang,    Him  we  touch; 

Men.  And  him  we  take. 
Cht.        Wherefore  fince  that  he  is  fuch  , 

Ang.   We  adore. 

Men.  And  we  do  crouch. 

Cb«.        Lord,  thy  praifes  ftiould  be  more. 

Men.    We  have  none, 

Ang.    And  we  no  (lore. 
Ck».        Priifed  be  the  God  alone, 

Who  hath  made  of  two  folda  one. 

HUn- 


86  The  Church. 

^     UnkindnelTe. 

LOrd,  make  me  coy  and  tender  to  offend: 
In  friendfliip,  firft  I  think,  if  that  agree, 
Wliich  I  intend, 
Unto  my  friends  intent  and  end. 
I  would  not  ufe  a  friend,  as  I  ufe  Thee. 

If  any  touch  my  friend,  or  his  good  name; 
It  is  my  honour  and  my  love  to  free 

His  blafted  fame 
From  the  lead  fpot  or  thought  of  blame. 
I  could  not  ufe  a  friend,  as  I  ufe  Thee. 

My  friend  may  fpit  upon  my  curious  floore: 
Would  he  have  gold?  I  lend  it  inftantly; 

But  let  the  poore. 
And  thou  within  them  ftarve  at  doore. 
I  cannot  ufe  a  friend ,  as  1  ufe  Thee. 

When  that  my  friend  pretendeth  to  a  place, 
I  quit  my  intereft,  and  leave  it  free  : 

But  when  thy  grace 
Sues  for  my  heart,  I  thee  displace. 
Nor  wotild  I  ufe  a  friend,  as  I  ufe  Thee. 

Yet  can  a  friend  what  thou  haft  done  fulfill  I 
O  write  in  braffe.  My  God  upon  a  tree 

His  bhui  did  spill 
Onely  topurcbaje  my  good-mill: 
Yet  ufe  I  not  my  foes,  as  I  ufe  thee. 

f  Life. 


I 
I 


The  Church.  87 

%  Life. 

I  Made  a  pofie,  while  the  day  ran  by: 
Here  will  I  fmell  my  remnant  out,  and  tie 

My  life  within  this  band. 
But  time  did  becken  to  the  flowers,  and  they 
By  noon  moft  cunningly  did  fteal  away, 

And wither'd  in  my  hand. 

My  hand  was  next  to  them,and  then  my  heart: 
I  took.without  more  thinking,  in  good  part 

Times  gentle  admonition; 
Who  did  fo  fweetly  deaths  fad  tafte  convey. 
Making  my  minde  to  fmell  my  fatall  day ; 

Yet  fugring  the  fufpicion. 

Farewell  deare  flowers,  fweetly  your  time  ye  fpent. 
Fit,  while  ye  liv'd,  for  fmell  or  ornament, 

And  after  death  for  cures. 
I  follow  ftraight  without  complaints  or  grief. 
Since  if  my  fent  be  good,  I  care  not,  if 

It  be  as  Ihort  as  yours. 


%  Submiffion, 

Bl '  t  that  thou  art  my  wifdome.  Lord, 
And  both  mine  eyes  are  thine, 
My  minde  would  be  extreamly  ftirr'd 
For  milTing  my  defigne. 

Were  it  net  better  to  bellow 

Some  place  and  power  on  me? 
Then  fhould  thy  praifes  with  me  grow. 

And  fhare  in  my  degree. 

But 


88  The  Church. 

But  when  I  thus  difpute  and  grieve, 

I  do  rcfumc  my  fight. 
And  pilfring  what  I  once  did  give, 

Difl'eize  thee  of  thy  right. 

How  know  l,if  thou  (houldfl  me  raife. 
That  I  (hould  then  raife  thee? 

Perhaps  great  places  and  thy  praife 
Do  not  fo  well  agree. 

Wherefore  unto  my  gift  I  ftand } 

1  will  no  more  advife: 
Onely  do  thou  lend  me  a  hand, 

Since  thou  hall  both  mine  cyei. 


^  Juftice. 

1  Cannot  skill  of  thefe  thy  wayes. 
L«rii,  thou  didft  make  m(,yet  ibou  vioundeft  me ; 
Lord,  thou  deji  wound tne,yet  thou  doft  relitvt  me: 
Lord,  thou  relievefl,yet  1  die  by  thee: 
Lord,  thou  doft  kill  me, yet  thou  doft  reprieve  me. 

But  when  I  mark  my  life  and  praife, 
Thy  juftice  me  moft  fitly  payes: 
For,  Ido  pritife  thee, yet  I  praife  thee  not: 
My  prefers  mean  thee, yet  my  prayers  ftray: 
1  would  do  well,  yet  linne  the  hand  hath  get : 
My  foul  doth  love  thee^et  it  loves  delay. 
I  cannot  skill  of  thefe  my  wayes. 


w 


^   Charms  and  Knots. 

Ho  reade  a  chapter  when  they  rife, 
Shall  ne're  be  troubled  with  ill  tyti. 


The  Church.  89 

A  poore  mans  rod,  when  thou  doft  ride, 
Is  both  a  weapon  and  a  guide. 

Who  ihuts  his  hand,  hath  loft  his  gold: 
Who  opens  it,  hath  it  twice  told. 

Who  goes  to  bed  and  doth  not  pray, 
Makethtwo  nights  toev'ryday. 

Who  by  afperfions  throw  a  ftone 
At  th'  head  of  others,  hit  their  own. 

Who  looks  on  ground  with  humble  eyw, 
Findes  himfelf  there,  and  feeks  to  rife. 

When  th'  hair  is  fweet  through  pride  or  lull, 
The  powder  doth  forget  the  dull. 

Take  one  from  ten  ,and  what  remains? 
Ten  ftill,  if  fermons  go  for  gains. 

In  (hallow  waters  heav'n  doth  fliow; 
But  who  drinks  on,to  hell  may  go. 


t  Affliftion. 

JVlY  God,  I  read  this  day, 
That  planted  Paradife  was  not  fo  firm, 
As  was  and  is  thy  floting  Ark;  whofe  Ihy 
And  anchor  thou  art  onely,  to  confirm 
And  ftrengthenit  inev'ry  age, 
When  waves  do  rife.and  tempeftsrage. 

At  firftweliv'd  in  pleafure; 
Thine  own  delights  thou  didft  to  us  impart: 
When  we  grew  wanton,thou  didft  ufe  difpleafure 
To  make  us  thine:  yet  that  we  might  not  part, 
As  we  atfirftdid  board  with  thee, 
Now  thou  wouldft  tafte  our  miferie. 


go  The  Church. 

There  is  but  joy  and  grief; 
If  either  will  convert  us,  we  are  thine: 
Some  Angels  us'd  the  firft;  if  our  relief 
Take  up  the  fecond,  then  thy  doulile  line 

And  fev'rall  baits  in  either  kinde 

Furnifh  thy  table  to  thy  minde. 

Affliftion  then  is  ours; 
We  are  the  trees,  whom  (haking  faftens  more, 
While  bluftring  windes  deftroy  the  wanton  bowres. 
And  ru£Be  all  their  curious  knots  and  ftore. 
My  God,  fo  temper  joy  and  wo, 
That  thy  bright  beams  may  tame  thy  bow. 


^   Mortification. 

J-JOw  foon  doth  man  decay! 
When  clothes  are  taken  from  a  cheft  of  fweets 
To  fwaddle  infants,  whofe  young  breath 

Scarce  knows  the  way; 
Thofeclouts  are  little  winding  ftieets. 
Which  do  configne  and  fend  them  unto  death. 

When  boyes  go  firft  to  bed. 
They  ftep  into  their  voluntarie  graves, 

Sleep  bindes  them  faft;  onely  their  breath 

Makes  them  not  dead: 
Succeffive  nights,  like  rolling  waves, 
Convey  them  quickly,  who  arc  bound  for  death. 

When  youth  is  frank  and  free, 
And  calls  for  mufick,  while  his  veins  do  fwell, 
All  day  exchanging  mirth  and  breath 

In  companie; 
That  mufick  fummons  to  the  knell, 
Which  (hall  befriend  him  at  the  houie  of  death. 

When 


The  Church.  91 

When  man  grows  ftaid  and  wife. 
Getting  a  houfe  and  home,  where  he  may  move 
Within  the  circle  of  his  breath, 

Schooling  his  eyes; 
That  dumbe  inclofure  maketh  love 
Uoto  the  coffin,  that  attends  his  death. 

When  age  grows  low  and  wealc, 
Marking  his  grave,  and  thawing  ev'ry  yeare. 
Till  all  do  melt,  and  drown  his  breath 

When  he  would  fpeak; 
A  chair  or  litter  Ihows  the  biere. 
Which  (hall  convey  him  to  the  houfe  of  death. 

Man,  ere  he  is  aware. 
Hath  put  together  a  folemnitie. 

And  dreft  his  herfe,  while  he  has  breath 

Asyettofpare: 
Yet  Lord,  inftruft  us  fo  to  die, 
That  all  thefe  dyings  may  be  life  in  death. 


^   Decay. 

OWeetwere  the  dayes,  when  thou  didft  lodge  with 
^Struggle  with  Jacob,  fit  with  Gideon,  (  Lot, 

Advife  with  Abraham,  when  thy  power  could  not 
Encounter  Mofes  ftrong  complaints  and  mone:  / 
Thy  words  were  then,i?/  mt  alone. 

One  might  have  fought  and  found  thee  prefently 
At  fome  fair  oak,  or  bulh,  or  cave,  or  well: 
It  my  God  this  way?  No,  they  would  reply: 
He  a  to  Sinai  gone,  as  we  heard  tell: 

Lift,  ye  may  heare  great  Aarons  bell. 

But 


92  The  Church. 

But  now  thou  doft  thy  felf  immure  and  clofc 
Jn  Tome  one  corner  of  a  feeble  heart: 
Where  yet  both  Sinne  and  Satan,  thy  old  foe«. 
Do  pinch  and  ftraiten  thee,  and  ufe  much  art 
To  gain  thy  thirds  and  little  part. 

I  lee  the  worldgrows  old,  when  as  the  heat 
Of  thy  great  love  once  fpread,  as  in  an  urn 
Doth  clofet  up  it  felf,  and  ftill  retreat. 
Cold  finne  dill  forcing  it,  till  it  return, 

And  calling  J  uftice,  all  things  burn. 


IT  Miferie. 

LOrd,  let  the  Angels  praife  thy  name. 
Man  is  a  fooliih  thing,  a  foolilh  thing, 

Folly  and  Sinne  play  all  his  game. 
Hit  houfe  ftill  burns,  and  yet  he  ftill  doth  Ang, 
ManiibutgraJJe, 
He  knows  it,  fill  the  glajje. 

How  canft  thou  brook  his  fooliftinefle? 
Why  hc'l  not  lofe  a  cup  of  drink  for  thee: 

Bid  him  but  temper  his  excefle; 
Not  he:  he  knows,  where  he  can  better  be. 
As  he  will  fwear, 
Then  to  ferve  thee  in  fear. 

What  ftrange  pollutions  doth  he  wed. 
And  make  his  own?  as  if  none  knew,  but  he. 

No  man  Ihall  beat  into  his  head. 
That  thou  within  his  curtains  drawn  canft  fee: 
They  are  of  cloth. 
Where  never  yet  came  moth. 


The 


The  Church.  93 

The  beft  of  men,  turn  but  thy  hand 
For  one  poore  minute,  ftumble  at  a  pinne: 

They  would  not  have  their  aflions  Icann'd, 
Nor  any  forrow  tell  them  that  they  finne, 
Though  it  be  fmall. 
And  meafare  not  their  fall. 

They  quarrell  thee,  and  would  give  over 
The  bargain  made  to  ferve  thee:  but  thy  love 

Holds  them  unto  it,  and  doth  cover 
Their  follies  with  the  wing  of  thy  milde  Dove, 
Not  fufF'ring  thofe 
Who  would,  to  be  thy  foes. 

My  God,  Man  cannot  praife  thy  name: 
Thou  art  all  brightnefle,perfeft  puritie; 

The  funne  holds  down  his  head  for  (hamc. 
Dead  wiiheclipfes,  when  we  fpeak  of  thee: 
How  (hall  infeftion 
Prefume  on  thy  perfedion? 

As  dirtie  hands  foul  all  they  touch,) 
And  thofe  things  moil,  which  are  moft  pure  and  fine: 

So  our  clay  hearts,  ev'n  when  we  crouch 
To  fmg  thy  praifes,  make  them  lefle  divine. 
Yet  either  this. 
Or  none  thy  portion  is. 

Man  caimot  ferve  thee;  let  him  go, 
And  ferve  the  fwine:  there,  there  is  his  delight: 

He  doth  not  like  this  vertue,  no; 
Give  hi  m  his  dirt  to  wallow  in  all  night: 
Thefe  Preachers  make 
His  head  to  ihoot  and  ake. 

Ok 


I 


94  'The  Church. 

Oh  foolifli  man!  where  are  thine  eyes? 
How  hail  thou  loft  them  in  a  croud  of  cares? 
Thou  pull'ft  the  rug,  and  wilt  not  rife, 
No  not  to  purchafc  the  whole  pack  of  ftarres: 
There  let  them  fhine. 
Thou  mull  go  fleep,  or  dine. 

The  bird  that  fees  a  daintic  bowre 
Made  in  the  tree,  where  (he  was  wont  to  fit, 

Wonders  and  fings,  but  not  his  power 
Who  made  the  arbourt  this  exceeds  her  wit. 
But  Man  doth  know 
The  fpring,  whence  all  things  fiow: 

And  yet  as  though  he  knew  it  not. 
His  knowledge  winks,  and  lets  his  humours  reigne ; 

Xhey  make  his  life  a  conflant  blot. 
And  ali  the  bloud  of  God  to  run  in  vain. 
Ah  wretch!  what  verfe 
Can  tiiy  ftrange  wayes  rehearfe? 

Indeed  at  iirft  Man  was  a  trcafure, 
A  boxofjewels,(hop  of  rarities, 

A  ring,whofe  pofie  wzi,My pleafure: 
He  was  a  garden  in  a  Paradifc: 

Glorie  and  grace 
Did  crown  his  heart  and  fac«. 

But  finne  hath  fool'd  him.  Now  he  it 
A  lump  of  flefti,  without  a  foot  or  wing 
To  raife  him  to  theglimpfe  of  blifie: 
A  fick  tofs'd  veffel,  dafhing  on  each  thing; 
Nay,  his  own  fhelf ; 
M/  God,  I  mean  my  felf. 


^  Jordan 


The  Church.  95 

•[[  Jordan. 

WHen  firft  my  lines  of  heav'nly  joyes  made  men  - 
Such  was  their  luftre,  they  did  fo  exceil,   (tion, 
That  I  fought  out  quaint  words,  and  trim  invention; 
iVly  thoughts  began  to  burni(h,fprout,and  fwell. 
Curling  with  metaphors  a  plain  intention, 
Decking  the  fenfe,  as  if  it  were  to  fell. 

Thoufands  of  notions  in  my  brain  did  runne, 

Off'ring  their  fervice,  if  I  were  not  fped: 

I  often  blotted  what  I  had  begunne; 

This  was  not  quick  enough,  and  that  was  dead. 

Nothing  could  fcem  too  rich  to  clothe  the  funne. 

Much  lefle  thofe  joyes  which  trample  on  his  he»d. 

As  flames  do  work  and  winde,  when  they  afcend. 
So  did  I  weave  my  felf  into  the  fenfe. 
But  while  1  bullied,  I  might  heare  a  friend 
Whifper,  Hotv  wide  is  all  this  long  pretence .' 
There  is  in  love  ajweetnejfe  readie  feniC d: 
Cspie  out  onely  that,  andfave  expenfe. 


1[  Prayer. 

Of  what  an  eafie  quick  acceffe, 
Mv  blefled  Lord,  art  thou !  how  fuddenly 

May  our  requelis  thine  eare  invade! 
To  fhe w  that  ftate  diflikes  not  eafinefle. 
If  I  but  lift  mine  eyes,  my  fuit  is  made: 
Thou  canil  no  more  not  heare,  then  thou  canft  die. 

Of 


96  The  Church. 

Of  what  fupreme  alniightie  power 
I;  thy  great  arm  which  (pans  the  eaft  and  weft, 

And  tacks  tfie  centre  to  the  fphere! 
By  it  do  all  things  live  their  meafur'd  houre : 
We  cannot  ask  the  thing,  which  is  not  there, 
Blaming  the  fliallownelTe  of  our  requeft. 

Of  what  unmeafurablc  love 
Art  thou  poffeft,  who,  when  thou  couldft  not  die, 

Wert  fain  to  take  our  flefh  and  curfe. 
And  for  our  fakes  in  perfon  finne  reprove, 
That  by  deftroying  that  which  ty'd  thy  purfc, 
Thou  mightft  make  way  for  liberalitie! 

Since  then  thefe  three  wait  on  thy  throne, 
Eaj'e,  Power,  and  Lcve;  I  value  prayer  fo. 

That  were  I  to  leave  all  but  one, 
Wealth,  fame,  endowments,  vertues,  all  fliould  go; 
I  and  deare  prayer  would  together  dwell. 
And  quickly  gain,  for  each  inch  loft,  an  ell. 


If    Obedience. 

\f  y  God,  if  writings  may 
Convey  a  Lordfhip  any  way 
Whither  the  buyer  and  the  feller  pleafe; 

Let  it  not  thee  difpleafe. 
If  this  poore  paper  do  as  much  as  they. 

On  it  my  heart  doth  bleed 
As  many  lines,  as  there  doth  need 
To  pafle  it  felf  and  all  it  hath  to  thee. 

To  which  I  do  agree. 
And  here  prefcnt  it  as  my  fpeciall  deed. 


It 


The  Church.  (^j 

If  that  hereafter  Pleafure 
Cavill,  and  claim  her  part  and  rftsra/ur:, 
Ai  if  this  pafied  with  a  rcfervation, 

Or  fame  fuch  words  in  fa/hior.; 
I  here  exclude  the  wrangler  from  thy  treafui*. 

O  let  thy  facred  will 

All  thy  delight  in  me  fulfill! 
Le:  me  not  think  an  aflion  mine  uvni  way, 
But  as  thy  love  Ihall  fway, 
'igning  up  the  rudder  to  thy  skill. 

Lord,  what  is  man  to  the*. 
1  hat  thou  fhouldft  minde  a  rotten  tree/ 
Yet  fince  thou  canft  not  choofe  but  iee  m/  liiioAa; 
So  great  are  thy  perfefliot:  j, 
iou  mayft  as  well  my  aftions  guide,  u  Te*. 

Befides,  thy  death  and  bUxid 
Show'd  a  ftrange  love  to  aJ!  our  good: 
-  ~y  forrows  were  in  earned;  no  faint  ptoffer. 

Or  fuperficiall  offer 
Of  what  we  might  not  take,  or  be  withftood. 

Wherefore  I  all  forgo: 
To  one  word  onely  I  fay,  No: 
'•'•  here  in  the  deed  there  was  an  intimation 

Of  a  f  ;/>  or  .-ionathn, 
I.-9rd,  let  it  now  by  war  of  purcba/t  go. 

He  that  wil!  paflc  his  liad, 
As  I  have  mine,  may  let  hi-  ht&d 
And  heart  unto  this  deed,  when  he  hath  «e«ij 

And  make  the  purchali  fp#»l 
To  both  our  goods,  if  he  to  it  wili  ftn.-xi. 

B  How 


98 


The  Church. 


How  happie  were  my  part, 
Jf  fome  kindc  man  would  thruft  his  heart 
Into  thele  lines;  till  in  heav'ns  court  of  rolls 

They  wefc  by  winged  fouls 
Entred  for  both,  faxre  above  their  defert! 


^  Confcience. 

PEacc  pratler,  do  not  lowre: 
Not  a  fair  look,  but  thou  doft  call  it  foul: 
Nota  fweet  difh,  but  thou  doft  call  it  fowre: 
Mufick  to  thee  doth  howl. 
By  liftning  to  thy  chatting  fears 
I  have  both  loft  mine  eye*  and  eares. 

Pratler,  no  more,  I  fay: 
My  thoughts  mutt  work,  but  like  a  noifeleffe  fphere; 
Harmonious  peace  muft  rock  them  all  the  day: 
No  room  for  pratlers  there. 
If  thou  perfifteft,  I  will  tell  thee. 
That  I  have  phyfick  toexpell  thee. 

And  thereceitfhall  be 
My  Saviours  bloud:  when  ever  at  his  board 
I  do  but  tafte  it,  ftraight  it  cleanfethme. 
And  leaves  thee  not  a  word; 
No,  not  a  tooth  or  nail  to  fcratch. 
And  at  my  adions  carp,  or  catch. 

Yet  if  thou  talkeft  ftill, 
Befides  my  phyfick,  know  there's  fome  for  thee: 
Some  wood  and  nails  to  make  a  ftaffe  or  bill 
For  thofe  that  trouble  me: 
The  bloudie  croffe  of  my  deare  Lord 
Is  both  my  phyfick  and  my  fword. 

5!  Slot 


The  Church.  99 

%.    Sion. 

LOrd,  with  what  glorie  waft  thou  ferv'd  of  old. 
When  Solomons  temple  flood  and  flourifhed! 
Where  moft  things  were  of  pureil  gold; 
The  wood  was  all  embellilhed 
With  flowers  and  carvings,  myfticall  and  rare: 
All  fhow'd  the  builders, crav'd  thefeers  care.  ^  *(.•"'"''' 

Yet  all  this  glorie.all  this  pomp  and  ftate 

Did  not  affeft  thee  much,  was  not  thy  aim; 
Something  there  was,  that  fow'd  debate: 
Wherefore  thou  quitt'ft  thy  ancient  claim; 

And  now  thy  Architefture  meets  withfinne; 

For  all  thy  frame  and  fabrick  is  within. 

There  thou  art  ftruggling  with  a  peevifli  heart. 
Which  fometimes  croffeth  thee,  thou  fometimes  it: 

The  fight  is  hard  on  either  part. 

Great  God  doth  fight,  he  doth  fubmit. 
All  Solomons  fea  of  braffe  and  world  of  ftone 
Is  not  fo  deare  to  thee  as  one  good  grone. 

And  truly  braffe  and  ftones  are  heavie  things, 
Tombes  for  the  dead, not  temples  fit  for  thee: 

But  grones  are  quick,  and  full  of  wings, 

And  all  their  motions  upward  be; 
And  ever  as  they  mount,  like  larks  they  fing; 
The  note  is  fad,  yet  muiick  for  a  king. 

U  Home. 

COme  Lord,  my  head  doth  burn,  my  heart  is  lii  k 
While  thou  doll  ever,  ever  ftay: 
Thy  long  deferrings  wound  me  to  the  quick. 
My  fpiritgafpeth  night  andday. 
O  {hew  thy  felf  tome, 
Or  take  me  up  to  thee! 

E  2  How 


^oo  The  Church. 

How  canft  thou  flay,  confideringthc  ptc* 

The  bloud  did  make,  which  thoudidft  w»*' 
When  I  behold  it  trickling  down  thy  face, 
I  never  Taw  thing  make  fuch  baftc. 
O  ftiow  thy  felf  to  me. 
Or  take  me  up  to  thee! 

When  man  was  loft,  thy  pitie  lookt  about 

To  fee  what  help  in  th'  earth  or  skie: 

But  there  was  none;  at  leaft  no  help  without: 
The  help  did  in  thy  bofome  lie. 
O  (how  thy,  tec. 

There  lay  thy  fonne:  and  muft  he  leave  that  nefk. 
That  hive  of  fwectncfle,to  remove 

Thraldome  from  thofe ,  who  would  not  at  a  feaft 
Leave  one  poorc  apple  (ox  thy  love? 
O  (how  thy.  Sec. 

He  did.he  came:  O  my  Redeemer  deare, 
After  all  this  canft  thou  be  ftrangc' 
So  many  yeares  bapttz'd,  and  not  appears? 
As  if  thy  love  could  fail  or  change. 
O  fhow  thy,  &c. 

Yet  if  thou  ftayeft  ftill,  why  muft  I  ftay? 

My  God,  what  is  this  world  to  me .' 
This  world  of  wo  ?  hence  ail  ye  clouds,  away, 
Awayj  I  muft  get  up  and  fee. 
O  ftiow  thy,  &c. 

■^'hat  is  this  weary  world;  this  meat  and  drink. 
That  chains  us  by  the  teeth  fo  faft? 

What  is  this  woman-kinde,  which  I  can  wink 
Into  a  blacknefle  and  diftafte? 
O  (how  thy,  &c. 


Witii  ^ 


The  Cburcb.  l  ., 

tn  one  fmall  figh  thou  gav'fl  me  th'  other  day 
I  blafted  all  the  joyes  about  me: 
And  fcoulingon  them  as  they  pin'd  away. 

Now  come  again,  laid  I,  and  flout  me. 
O  fhow  thy  Iclf  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  thee! 

Nothing  bat  drought  and  dearth,  but  buih  and  brake 

Which  way  fo-e'rc  I  look,  I  fee. 
Some  may  dream  merrily,  but  when  they  waite, 

They  drefle  themfelvesand  come  to  thee. 
0(howthy,&c. 

We  t«Ik  of  harvefts;  there  are  no  iuch  things. 
But  when  vvc  leave  our  corn  and  hay: 

There  is  no  fruitfull  ycare,  but  that  which  brings 
The  laft  and  lov'd,  though  dreadful!  day. 
O  (how  thy,  &c. 

Oh  loofe  this  frame,  this  knot  of  man  untie! 

That  my  free  foul  may  ufe  her  wing, 
Which  now  is  pinion'd  with  morialiiie. 

At  an  intangled,  hamper'd  thing. 
Oftiow  thy,&c. 

Whjjt  have  I  left,  that  I  (hould  ftay  and  grone^ 
The  mot!  of  me  to  hcav'n  is  fled: 

My  thoughts  and  joyes  arc  all  packt  up  and  ganc. 
And  for  their  old  acquaintanee  plead. 
Ofliow  thy,&c. 

Come  deareft  Lord,  paffe  not  this  holy  ieafon, 
.    My  flefti  and  tones  and  joy nts  do  pray: 
And  ev'n  my  verfe,  when  by  the  ryme  and  reaibn 
The  word  is,5r.ijf,  layes  ever,  Ctnt. 
O  (how  thy,  ic. 


E3  11  Th. 


102  T^he  Church. 

^   The  Britifli  Church. 

IJoy,  deare  Mother,  when  I  view 
Thy  perfeft  lineaments,  and  hue 

Both  Aveet  and  bright. 

Beautie  in  thee  takes  up  her  place. 
And  dates  her  letters  from  thy  face. 

When  (he  doth  write. 

A  fine  afpedt  in  fit  aray, 

N  either  too  mean,  nor  yet  too  gay. 

Shows  who  is  beft. 

Outlandifli  looks  may  not  compare : 
For  all  they  either  painted  are. 

Or  elfeundreft. 

She  on  the  hills,  which  wantonly 
Allureth  ali  in  hope  to  be 

By  her  preferr'd. 

Hath  kils'd  fo  long  her  painted  flirines. 
That  ev*n  her  face  by  kiffing  fhines, 
For  her  reward. 

She  in  the  valley  is  fo  fliie 

Of  dreffing,  that  her  hair  doth  lie 

About  her  eares : 

While  (he  avoids  her  neighbours  pride. 
She  wholly  goes  on  th'  other  fide. 

And  nothing  wears. 

Bot  deareft  Mother,  (what  thofe  miiTc) 
The  mean  thy  praife  and  glorie  is, 

And  long  may  be. 

BlefTed  be  God,  whofe  love  it  was 
To  double-moat  thee  with  his  grace. 

And  none  bu  t  thse.  ^  The  ' 


The  Church.  103 

f    The  Quip. 

THe  merrie  world  did  on  a  day 
With  his  train-bands  and  mates  agree 
To  meet  together,  where  I  lay. 
And  all  in  ^ort  to  geere  at  me. 

Firft,  Beautie  crept  into  a  rofe. 
Which  when  I  pluckt  not,Sir,faid  flie, 
Tell  me,  I  pray,  Whofe  hands  are  thofe  f 
But  thoa  (halt  anfwer.  Lord,  for  me. 

Then  Moneycame,  and  chinking ftill, 
What  tune  is  this,  poore  man  P  faid  he: 
I  heard  in  Muilck  you  had  skill. 
But  thou  fhalt  anfwer.  Lord,  for  me. 

Then  came  brave  Gloric  puffing  by 

In  filks  that  whiftled,  who  but  he?  m 

He  fcarce  allow'd  me  half  an  eie. 

But  thou  (halt  anfwer.  Lord,  for  me. 

Then  came  quick  Wit  and  Converfation , 
And  he  would  needs  a  comfort  be, 
And,  to  be  (hort,  make  an  oration. 
But  thou  Ihalt  anfwer,  Lord,  for  me. 

Yet  when  the  houre  of  thy  defigne 
To  anfwer  thefe  fine  things  (hall  come; 
Speak  not  at  large,  fay,  I  am  thine: 
And  then  they  have  their  anfwer  home. 

E  A  •  Vanitie. 


1 C4  T6e  Church. 

%    Vanitie. 

POore  filly  foul,  whofe  hope  andhead  lies  low; 
Whofe  flit  delights  on  earth  docrcep  and  grow; 
lo  whom  the  flarrct  (hine  not  fo  fair,  a* cyet; 
Nor  foiid  work,  as  falfe  embroyderics; 
Hesrk  and  beware,  left  what  you  now  do  mcafure 
And  write  for  fwcet,  provea  moft  fowre  dilpiemfttre. 

O  hearc  betimes,  left  thy  relenting 

May  come  too  late! 
To  purchafe  heaven  for  repenting. 

It  no  hard  rate. 
If  ibuls  be  made  of  earthly  mold. 

Let  them  love  gold; 

If  born  on  high. 
Let  them  unto  their  kindred  flie: 
For  they  can  never  be  at  reft, 
Tin  they  regain  their  ancient  neft 
Then  filly  foul  take  heed;  for  earthly  joy 
I»  but  a  bubble,  and  makes  thee  a  boy. 


^    The  Dawning- 

AWake  fad  heart,  whom  forrow  ever  drowni; 
Take  up  thine  eyes,  which  feed  on  earthi 
Unfold  thy  forehead  gather'd  into  frowns : 
Thy  Saviour  comes,  and  with  him  mirth: 
Awake,  awake; 
And  with  a  thaakfull  heart  his  comforts  take. 
Bvit  thoudoft  ftilUament,  and  pine,  and crie; 
And  feel  his  death,  but  net  his  viftorie. 


Arik 


The  Church.  1 05 

Arife  fad  heart;  if  thou  doft  not  withftand, 

Chriib  refurreflion  thine  may  be: 
Do  not  by  hanging  down  brealc  from  the  hand. 
Which  as  it  rifeth,  raifeth  thee: 

Arife,  arife; 
And  with  his  burialMinen  drie  thine  eyes:  (  grief 

Chrift  left  his  grave-clothes,  that  we  might,  when 
Draws  tears,  or  bIoud,not  want  an  handkerchief 


H  Jesu. 

JE  S  U  is  in  my  heart,  his  facred  name 
Is  deeply  carved  there :  but  th'other  week 
A  great  affliftion  broke  the  little  frame, 
Ev'n  all  to  pieces:  which  I  went  to  feck: 
And  firft  I  found  the  corner,  where  was  J, 
After,where  E  S,  and  next  where  V  was  graved. 
When  I  had  got  thefe  parcels, inftantly 
I  fat  me  down  to  fpell  them,  and  perceived 
That  to  my  broken  heart  he  was  leafeyou. 

And  to  my  whole  is  JES^j. 


•f  Bufineffe. 


CAnft  be  idle ?canft  thou  play, 
Foolifli  foul  who  finn'd  to  day  ' 

Rivers  run,  and  fprings  each  one 
Know  their  home,  and  get  them  gone: 
Haft  thou  tears,  or  haft  thou  none  ? 

If,  poore  foul,  thou  haft  no  tears; 
Would  thou  hadft  no  faults  or  fears  !  . 
Who  hath  thefe,  thofe  ill  forbears. 

E  5  Windej 


1 06  The  Cburcb. 

Windei  ftilt  woric:  it  it  their  plot, 

Be  the  fcaion  cold,  or  hot: 

Hift  thou  fight,  or  haft  thou  not  f 

If  thou  haft  no  ^hs  or  grones, 
Would  thou  hadft  no  fiefh  and  bonu.' 
Leflcr  paias  kape  greater  ones. 

But  if  yet  thou  idle  be, 
FooUQi  fou:,  WhodJ'd  for  thee  ? 

Who  did  leave  hit  Father*  throne, 
To  aiTume  thy  fielh  and  bone; 
Had  be  life,  or  bad  he  none? 

If  be  had  not  liv'd  for  thee. 
Thou  badft  di'd  moft  wretchedly ; 
And  two  deaths  had  been  thy  fee. 

He  f<5  farre  thy  good  did  plot. 
That  his  own  felf  he  forgot. 
Did  he  die,  or  did  heoot? 

If  be  bad  not  di'd  for  thee, 

Tliau  hkdft  liv'd  in  miferie. 

Two  lives  worfie  then  ten  deaths  be. 

And  hath  any  fpace  of  breath 
'Twixt  hit  fmnes  and  Saviours  death? 

He  that  lofetbgold,  though  droffe. 
Tells  to  all  he  meets,  his  croflc: 
He  that  finnes,  hath  beaolo£c  ? 

He  that  findes  a  (i)ver  vein. 
Thinks  on  it,  and  thinks  again: 
Brings  thy  Saviours  death  no  gain? 

Who  in  heart  not  ever  kneels, 
Neither  finne  nor  Saviour  fecit. 


The  Church.  107 

^  Dialogue. 

SWeeteft  Saviour,  if  my  foul 
Were  but  worth  the  having, 
Quickly  ftiouJd  I  then  control! 

Any  thought  of  waving. 
But  when  all  my  cire  and  paini 
Cannot  give  the  name  of  gains 
To  thy  wretch  fo  full  of  ftains; 
What  delight  or  hope  rcmair5? 

What  (  cbiltie')  is  the  balknte  thine, 

Tl>ine  tbepoi/e  and  me  a  fur  e? 
If  1  fay,  Thoujbalt  be  mine; 

Finger  not  my  treafure.  ' 

IVkat  the  gains  in  having  thee 
T})  amount  to,  onely  he, 
IVbofor  man  viaifold,  can  fee; 
That tranif err' d tb'aecountt  t»  me. 

But  as  I  can  lee  no  merit  ,  ' 

Leading  to  this  favour: 
So  the  way  to  fit  me  for  it. 

Is  beyond  my  favour. 
As  the  reafon  then  is  thine; 
So  the  way  is  none  of  mine: 
I  difclaim  the  whole  defigne: 
Sinne  difclaims  and  1  refigne. 

That  is  all,  if  that  I  eould 

Get  without  repining; 
And  my  clay  my  creature  teoali 

Follow  my  rejigning. 
That  at  I  did  freely  part 
IVitb  my  glorie  and  defer t. 
Left  all  joyes  to  feel  allfmnrt-— 

Ah  /  no  more:  thou  break'ft  my  heart. 

f  Dulneffe 


io8  The  Church. 

*!    DulneiTe. 

VV^y  do  I  languifh  thus,  drooping  and  dull. 

As  ifl  were  all  earth? 
Ogive  mc  quickncffe,  that  I  may  with  mirth 
Praife  thee  brim-full ! 

The  wanton  lover  in  a  curious  ftrain 

Can  praife  his  faireft  fair; 
And  with  quaint  metaphors  her  curled  hair 
Curl  o're  again. 

Thou  art  my  lovelinefle,  my  life,  my  light, 

Beautje  alone  to  me: 
Thy  bloudy  death  and  undeferv'd,  maltes  thee 
Pure  red  and  white. 

When  all  perfeilions  as  but  one  appeare. 

That  ihofc  thy  form  doth  fliow. 
The  very  dull,  where  thou  doft  tread  and  go, 
Makes  beauties  here  ; 

Where  are  my  lines  then?  my  approaches?  views? 

Where  are  my  window-fongs? 
Lovers  are  ftill  pretending,  &  ev'n  wrongs 
Sharpen  their  Mufe: 

But  I  am  loft  in  flefh,  whofe  fugred  lyes 

Still  mock  me,  and  grow  bold: 
Sure  thou  didft  put  a  minde  there  ,  if  I  could 
Finde  wherjit  lies. 

Lord,  clearc  thy  gift,  that  with  a  conftant  wit 

I  may  but  look  towards  thee: 
iL«#i  onely;  for  to /*f/ thee,  who  can  be. 
What  angel  fit  ? 


^  Love-joy. 


The  Church.  109 

^  Love-joy. 

AS  on  a  window  late  I  caft  mine  eye, 
I  faw  a  vine  drop  grapes  with  J  and  C 
Anneal'd  on  every  bunch.  One  Handing  by 
Ask'd  what  it  meant.  I  (who  am  never  loth 
To  fpend  my  iudgement)  faid.  It  feem'd  to  me 
To  be  the  bodie  and  the  letters  both 
Of  Joy  and  Charitie.  Sir,  you  have  not  mifs'd. 
The  man  reply'd  ;  It  figures  JESVS  CHRIST. 


^  Providence. 

O  Sacred  Providence,who  from  end  to  end 
Strongly  and  fweetly  moveft!  (hall  I  write. 
And  not  of  thee,through  whom  my  fingers  bend 
To  hold  my  quill?  fhall  they  not  do  thee  right? 

Of  all  the  creatures  both  in  fea  and  land 
Onely  to  Man  thou  haft  made  known  thy  wayes. 
And  put  the  penne  alone  into  his  hand. 
And  made  him  Secretarie  of  thy  praife. 

Beafts  fain  would  fing;  birds  dittie  to  their  notes; 
Trees  would  be  tuning  on  their  native  lute 
To  thy  renown:  but  all  their  hands  and  throats 
Are  brought  to  Man,  while  they  are  lame  and  mute. 

Man  is  the  worlds  high  Prieft:  he  doth  prefent 
The  facrifice  for  all ;  while  they  belovir 
Unto  the  fervice  mutter  an  aflent, 
ach  as  fprings  ufe  that  fall.and  vtrindes  that  blow. 

He  that  to  praife  and  laud  thee  doth  refrain, 

Doth  not  refrain  unto  himfelf  alone. 

But  robs  a  thoufand  who  would  praife  thee  fain. 

And  doth  commit  a  world  of  finne  in  one.  The 


no  The  Church. 

The  beads  fay.  Eat  me:but,if  beads  muft  teach, 
The  tongue  is  yours  to  eat,  but  mine  to  praifc. 
The  trees  fay,Pull  me:  but  the  hand  you  ftretch. 
Is  mine  to  write  ,  as  it  is  yours  to  raife. 

Wherefore,moft  facred  Spirit,!  here  prefent 
For  me  and  all  my  fellows  praife  to  thee: 
And  juft  it  is  that  I  Ihould  pay  the  rent, 
Becaufe  the  benefit  accrues  to  me. 

We  all  acknowledge  both  thy  power  and  love 
To  bee3fafl,tranfcendent,and  divine; 
Who  doft  fo  ftrongly  and  fo  fweetly  move. 
While  all  things  have  their  will,yet  none  but  thine. 

For  either  iky  command,  or  thy  permijjion 
Lay  hands  on  alhthey  arethy  right  and  Uft. 
Thefirft  puts  on  withfpeed  and  expedition; 
Theother  curbs  (innes  flealing  pace  and  theft. 

Nothing  efcapes  them  both ;  all  muft  appeare. 
And  be  difpos'd.and  drefs'd.and  tun'd  by  thee. 
Who  fweetly  temper'ft  all.  If  we  could  heare 
Thy  skill  and  art,  what  mufjck  would  it  be! 

Thou  art  in  fmall  things  great,  not  fmall  in  any: 
.Thy  even  praife  can  neither  rife,  nor  fall. 
Thou  art  in  all  things  one,  in  each  thing  many: 
For  thou  art  infinite  in  one  and  all. 

Tempefts  are  calm  to  thee;  they  know  thy  hand. 
And  hold  it  faft.as  children  do  their  fathers. 
Which  crie  and  follow.  Thou  haft  made  poore  fand 
Check  the  proud  fea.ev'n  when  it  fwells  and  gathers. 

Thy  cupboard  ferves  the  world :  the  meat  is  fet. 
Where  all  may  reach:no  beaft  but  knows  his  feed. 
Birds  teach  us  hawking;  iifhcs  have  their  net: 
The  great  prey  on  the  lelTe,  they  on  fomc  weed. 

Nothing 


The  Church.  ill 

Nothing  ingendred  doth  prevent  hi»  meat: 
Flies  have  their  table  fpread.ere  they  appeare. 
Some  creatures  have  in  winter  what  toeat; 
Other>dofleep,andenvienot  their  cheer. 

How  finely  doft  thou  times  and  feafons  fpin. 
And  makea  twiftchecker'd  with  night  and  day! 
Which  as  it  lengthens  windes,and  windes  us  in. 
As  bouls  go  on,  but  turning  all  the  way. 

Each  creature  hath  a  wifdome  for  his  good. 
The  pigeons  feed  their  tender  oiF-fpring.crying, 
When  they  are  callow;  but  withdraw  their  food 
When  they  are  fledge.that  need  may  teach  the  flying. 

Beci  work  for  man ;  and  yet  they  never  bruife  "I 
Their  mafters  flower.but  leave  it,having  done. 
As  fair  as  ever,  and  as  fit  lo  ufe ;  J 

So  both  the  iiower  doth  ftay,  and  hony  run. 

Sheep  eat  the  grafle,  and  dung  the  ground  for  more; 
Trees  after  bearing  drop  their  leaves  for  foil: 
Springs  vent  their  ftreams,  and  by  expenfe  get  (lore: 
Clouds  cool  by  heat,  and  iaaths  by  cooling  boil. 

Who  hath  the  vertue  to  exprefle  the  rare 
And  curious  vertues  both  of  herbs  and  ftoneJ^ 
Is  there  an  herb  for  that?  O  that  thy  care   T 
Would  fliow  a  root,  that  gives  expreffions!  J  ^'^ 

.^nd  if  an  herb  hath  power.what  have  the  ilarres? 
A  rofe.bcfides  his  beau  tie,  is  a  cure. 
Doubtlefic  our  plagues  and  plentie,  peace  and  warrcs 
Are  there  much  furer  then  our  art  is  furc. 

Thou  haft  hid  metals:  man  may  take  them  thence; 
But  at  his  perill:  when  he  digs  the  place,  ^ 
He  makes  a  grave  |  as  if  the  thing  had  fenfe,  | 

And  thrcatned  laan.that  he  (hould  fill  the  fpsccj 

Ev'n 


1 1 2  The  Church. 

Ev'n  poyfons  praife  thee.  Should  a  thing  be  loft? 
Should  creatures  want  for  want  of  heed  their  duc.' 
Sincc  where  are  poyfons,  antidots  are  moft: 
The  help  ftands  clofe,  and  keeps  the  fear  in  view. 

The  fea,  which  fcems  to  flop  the  traveller. 
Is  by  a  ftiip  the  fpeedier  pafTage  made. 
The  windeSjwho  think  they  rule  the  mariner. 
Are  rul'd  by  him,and  taught  to  ferve  his  trade. 

And  as  thy  houfe  is  full ,  fo  I  adore 

Thy  curious  art  in  marflialling  thy  goods. 

The  hills  with  health  abound;  the  vales  with  (lore; 

The  South  with  marblejNorth  withfurrcs  &  woods. 

Hard  things  are  glorious;  eafie  things  good  cheap. 
The  common  all  men  have;  that  which  is  rare. 
Men  therefore  feck  to  have,  and  care  to  keep. 
The  healthy  frofts  with  fummer-fruits  compare. 

Light  without  winde  is  glaffe:  warm  without  weight 
Is  wool!  and  furres;  cool  without  clofene(re,lhade: 
Speed  without  pains.a  horfe:  tall  without  height, 
A  fervile  hawTc:  low  without  lofle,  a  fpade. 

All  countreys  have  enough  to  ferve  their  need: 
If  they  feek  fine  things, thou  doft  make  them  run 
For  their  offence;  and  then  doft  turn  their  fpeed 
To  be  commerce  and  trade  from  funnc  to  funne. 

Nothing  wears  clothes,  but  Man;  nothing  doth  need 
But  he  to  wear  them.  Nothing  ufeth  fire, 
But  Man  alone,  to  Ihow  his  heav'niy  breed: 
And  onely  hehathfuell  in  defire. 

When  th' earth  wasdry.thou  mad'ftafcaof  wet: 
Whe  that  lay  gather'd,thou  didft  broach  the  moutains: 
When  yet  fome  places  could  no  moifture  get,     (tains. 
The  windesgrew  gard'ners,and  the  clouds  good  foun- 

Rain 


'Ihe  Church.  i  13 

Raia,do  no:  hurt  my  flowers;  but  gently  fpend 
Your  hony  drops:  prcffe  not  tofmei!  them  here: 
When  they  are  ripe.their  odour  will  afccnd, 
And  at  your  lodging  with  their  thanks  appcare. 

How  harlh  are  thorns  to  pears !  and  yet  they  tnaice 
A  better  hedge,  and  need  Itfle  reparation. 
Haw  fmooth  are  filks compared  with  a  flake, 
Or  with  a  (lone!  yet  make  no  good  foundation. 

Soccetimcs  thou  doft  divide  thy  gifts  to  man, 
Sowerimcs  unite.  The  Indian  nutaione 
I»  dothing,ineat  and  trencher,drink  and  kan, 
Boat.cablcjlail  and  needle,  all  in  one. 

Moft  herbs  that  grow  in  brooks,arc  hot  aod  dry. 
Cold  fruits  warm  kernells  help  againft  the  windc. 
The  lemmons  juice  and  rinde  cure  mutually. 
The  whey  of  milk  doth  loofe,the  milk  doth  binde. 

"•"hy  creatures  leap  not,  but  cxprcflc  a  feaft, 
■''here all  theguefts  fit  clofe.and  nothing  wanii. 
-:>g«  marry  filh  and  flelh;  bats,bird  and  bead ; 
oongej,non-fenfc  and  fcnre;mincs,th' earth  &piinti. 

To  Jho w  thou  art  not  bound ,  as  if  thy  lot 
Were  worfe  then  ours;  fometimes  thou  Ihiftcft  hands. 
Moft  things  move  th'  under-jaw;the  Crocodile  not. 
Maft  things  ileep  lying;  th'  Elephant  leans  or  ftands. 

But  who  hath  praife  enough?nay  who  hath  any .' 
None  can  cxprefle  thy  works.but  he  that  knows  them; 
And  none  can  know  thy  works.which  are  fo  many, 
And  fo  complete,  but  onety  he  that  owes  them. 

All  things  that  are,though  they  have  fcv'rall  wayes. 
Vet  in  their  being  joyn  withone  advife 
To  honour  thee  '  and  fo  I  give  thee  praife 
In  all  my  other  hymnes,  but  ia  this  twice. 

Each 


1 14  The  Church. 

E»ch  thing  that  is,  although  in  ufe  and  name 
it  go  for  one,  hath  many  wayes  in  ftore 
To  honour  thee;  and  fo  each  hymne  thy  fame 
Extolleth  many  wayes,  yet  this  one  more. 


I 


f    Hope. 

Gave  to  Hope  a  watch  of  mine:  bat  he 
„  An  anchor  gave  to  me. 

Then  an  old  prayer-book  I  did  prefent: 

And  he  an  optick  fent. 
With  that  Igaveaviall  full  of  tears: 

But  he  a  few  green  eares: 
Ah  Loyterer!  I'le  no  more.no  more I'le  bring: 

I  did  expeft  a  ring. 
^ 

S  Sinnes  round.* 

SOrrie  I  am,  my  God,  forrie  I  am, 
That  my  offences  courfe  it  in  a  ring. 
My  thoughts  are  working  like  a  bufie  flame, 
I]  ntill  their  cockatrice  they  hatch  and  bring: 
And  when  they  once  have  perfefted  their  draughts, 
My  words  take  fire  from  my  inflamed  thoughts. 

My  words  take  fire  from  my  inflamed  thoughts. 

Which  fpit  it  forth  like  the  Sicilian  hill. 

They  vent  the  wares  .and  pafle  them  with  their  faults. 

And  by  their  breathing  ventilate  the  ill. 

But  words  fuffice  not, where  are  lewd  intentions: 

My  hands  do  joyn  to  finiih  the  inventions. 

My  hands  do  joyn  to  finifli  the  inventions: 

And  fo  my  finnes  afcend  three  ftories  high, 

As  Babel  grew,  before  there  were  diflentions. 

Yet  ill  deeds  loyter  not:  for  they  fupplie 

New  thoughts  of  finning:  wherefore.to  my  fhame, 

Sorriel  am,  my  God.forrie  I  am.  ^  Time. 


The  Church.  1 1 5 

H   Time. 

M Bering  with  Time,  flack  thing,  faid  I, 
Thy  fithe  is  doll;  whet  it  for  fljame. 
No  marvell  Sir,  he  did  replie. 
If  it  at  length  defer ve  fome  blame: 

But  where  one  man  would  have  me  grinde  it, 
Twentie  for  one  too  ftiarp  do  finde  it. 

Perhaps  fomefuch  of  old  did  pafTc, 

Who  above  all  things  lov'd  this  life ; 

To  whom  thy  fithe  a  hatchet  was, 

Which  now  is  but  a  pruning-knifc. 

Chrifts  coming  hath  made  man  thy  dehter, 
Since  by  thy  cutting  he  grows  better. 

And  in  his  bleffing  thou  art  bleft: 
For  where  thouonely  wert  before 
An  executioner  at  beft; 
Thou  art  a  gard'ner  now,  and  more, 

An  ufherto  convey  our  fouls 

Beyond  the  utmoft  ftarres  and  poles. 

And  this  is  that  makes  life  fo  long. 
While  it  detains  us  from  our  God. 
Ev'n  pleafures  here  increafe  the  wrong, 
And  length  of  dayes  lengthen  the  rod. 

Who  wants  the  place,  where  God  doth  dwell. 

Partakes  already  half  of  hell. 

Of  what  ftrange  length  muft  that  needs  be. 
Which  ev'n  eternitie  excludes! 
Thus  farre  Time  heard  me  patiently: 
Then  chafing  faid.  This  man  deludes: 

What  do  I  here  before  his  doore? 

He  doth  not  crave  leffe  time,  but  more. 

\  Grate- 


lib  TheChurcb. 

%  Gratefulnefle. 

THou  that  haft  giv'n  To  much  to  tm., 
Give  one  thing  morc,a  grateful)  he«rt 
See  how  thy  beggar  works  on  thee 
By  art. 

He  makes  thy  gifts  occafion  more , 
And  (ayes.  If  he  in  this  be  croft. 
All  thou  haft  giv'n  him  heretofore 
Is  loft. 

But  thou  didft  reckon,  when  at  firft 
Thy  word  our  hearts  and  hands  did  eT»»e, 
What  it  would  come  to  at  the  worft 
To  fave. 

Perpetuall  knockings  at  thy  doore. 
Tears  fuUying  thy  tranfparent  rooms. 
Gift  upon  gift,much  would  have  more. 
And  comes. 

This  not  withftanding,  thou  wentft  on. 
And  didft  allow  us  all  our  noife: 
Nay  thou  haft  made  a  flgh  and  gronc 
Thy  joyes. 

Not  chat  thou  haft  not  ftill  above 
Much  better  tunes, then  grones  can  make; 
fiat  that  theie  countrey-aires  thy  love 
Did  take. 

Wherefore  I  crie,  and  crie  again; 

And  in  no  qoiet  canft  thou  be,  ' 

Till  I  a  thank  full  heart  obtain 

Of  theer 

Not 


The  Cburcb.  I  \-j 

No«  ihsnkfull,  when  it  pleafeth  me; 

At  if  thy  blel'sjngj  had  (pare  dayes: 

Hut  ruchaheart.whofe  pulfe  may  be 

Thy  praife. 


%  Peace. 

SWeet  Petce.where  doft  thou  dwell?!  humbiy  crarc. 
Let  me  once  know. 
I  fought  thee  m  a  fecret  cave. 
And  ask'd.if  Peace  were  there. 
A  hollow  winde  did  feem  to  anfwer,  No: 

Go  feek  elfcwhere. 

I  did;  and  going  did  a  rainbow  note : 

Surely,  thought  I. 
This  is  the  lace  of  Peaces  coat; 
I  will  fearch  out  the  matter. 
But  while  I  lookt,  the  clouds  immediately 

Did  break  and  fcatter. 


Then  went  I  to  a  garden ,  and  did  fpy 

A  gallant  flower, 
The  crown  ImperialhSure/aid  I, 
Peace  at  the  root  muft  dwell. 
But  when  I  digg'd,  1  faw  a  worm  devourc 

WhatOiow'd  fo  well. 

At  length  I  met  a  rcv'rend  good  old  man, 

Whom  when  for  Peace 
I  did  demand;  he  thus  began: 
There  was  a  Prince  of  old 
At  Salem  dwch.wholiv'd  with  good  inereafe 
Of  flock  and  fold. 

He 


1 1 8  The  Church, 

He  fweetly  liv'd;yet  fweetnefle  did  not  Cave 
His  life  from  foes. 
But  after  death  out  of  his  grave 

There  fprang  twelve  ftalks  oi  wheat: 
Which  many  wondringat.got  fome  of  thofe 
To  plant  and  fet. 

It  profper'd  ftrangely,  and  did  foon  difperfe 
Through  all  the  earth: 
For  they  that  tafte  it  do  rehearfe, 
That  vertue  lies  therein, 
A  fecret  vertue  bringing  peace  and  mirth 
By  flight  of  finne. 

Take  of  this  grain,  which  in  my  garden  grows. 
And  grows  for  you; 
Make  bread  of  it:  and  that  repofe 
And  peace  which  ev'ry  where 
With  fo  much  earneftnefle  you  do  purfu 
Is  onely  there. 


%  Confeflion. 

\J  What  a  cunning  gueft 
Is  this  fame  grief!  within  my  heart  I  made 

Clofets;  and  in  them  many  a  cheft; 

And  like  a  mailer  in  my  trade, 
In  thofe  chefts,  boxes;  in  each  box,  a  tilh 
Yet  grief  knows  all,  and  enters  when  he  will. 

No  fcrue,  no  piercer  can 
Into  a  piece  of  timber  work  and  winde. 
As  Gods  afHiftions  into  man. 
When  he  a  torture  hath  defign'd. 
They  are  too  fubtill  for  the  fubt'lleft  hearts; 
And  fall,  like  rheumes,  upon  the  tendieft  parts. 

Wc 


T^he  Church.  1 1 9 

We  are  the  earth;  and  they, 
•  c  moles  within  us,  heave,  and  caft  about: 
And  till  they  foot  and  clutch  their  prey. 
They  never  cool,  much  lefTe  give  out. 
No  fmith  can  make  fuch  locks,  but  they  have  keyes: 
Clofets  are  halls  to  them;  and  hearts,  high-wayes. 

Onely  an  open  breaft 
Doth  (hut  them  out,  fo  that  they  cannot  enter; 
Or,  if  they  enter,  cannot  reft. 
But  quickly  feek  fome  new  adventure. 
Smooth  open  hearts  nofaftning  have;  but  fidlion 
Doth  give  a  hold  and  handle  to  affliftion. 

Wherefore  my  faults  and  ilnnes. 
Lord,  I  acknowledge;  take  thy  plagues  away: 

For  fince  confeffion  pardon  winnes, 

I  challenge  here  the  brighteft  day. 
The  cleareft  diamond:  let  them  do  their  beft, 
They  fliali  be  thick  and  cloudie  to  nty  breaft. 


t  Giddinefle. 

OH,  what  a  thing  is  man!  how  farre  from  power, 
From  fetled  peace  and  refti 
He  is  fome  twentie  fev'rall  men  at  leaft 
Each  fev'rall  houre. 

One  while  he  counts  of  heav'n,  as  of  his  treafure; 

But  then  a  thought  creeps  in, 
And  calls  him  coward,  who  for  fear  of  ficne 

Will  lofe  a  pleafurc. 

Now 


J  20  The  Church. 

Now  he  will  fight  it  out,  and  to  the  wirresj 

Now  eat  his  bread  in  feacc, 
And  fnudge  in  quiec  now  he  fcorns  iticruiic ; 
Now  all  day  fparei. 

He  builds  a  houfe,  which  quickly  down  moft  go, 
As  if  a  whirl  windc  blew 

Andcrulhtthc  building:  and  it's  partly  txae, 
His  mindc  is  To. 

O  what  a  fight  were  Man,  if  his  attire* 
Did  alter  with  his  minde; 

And  like  a  Dolphins  skinnc,  his  cicthescombis'd 
With  his  defires! 

Surely  if  each  one  faw  anothcrs  heah, 

There  would  be  no  commerce, 

No  fale  or  bargain  paffe:  all  would  difpcrie, 
And  live  apart. 

Iy>rd,inend  or  rather  make  us:  onecreiiioa 

Will  not  fuffice  our  turn: 
Except  thou  makeusdayly,  we  (hall  fpnra 
Our  own  falvatioQ. 


%  The  bunch  of  gra[>es. 

JOy ,  I  did  lock  thee  up:  but  foice  bad  mm 
Hath  let  thee  cut  again : 
And  now,  me  thinks,  I  am  where  I  began 
Se v'n  yeares  ago :  one  vogue  and  ve:a. 
One  aire  of  thoughts  ufurps  my  braio. 
I  did  toward  Canaan  draw;  but  now  I  am 
Brought  back  to  the  Red  fea,  the  fes  of  thame. 


For 


The  Church.  121 

For  ai  the  Jews  of  old  by  Gods  command 

Travell'd,  and  faw  no  town: 
So  now  each  Chriftian  hath  his  journeys  fpann'd: 

Their  ftorie  pennes  and  fets  us  down. 

A  (ingle  deed  is  fmall  renown. 
Gods  works  are  wide,  and  let  in  future  times; 
His  ancient  juftice  overflows  our  crimes. 

Then  have  we  too  our  guardian  fires  and  clouds; 

Our  Scripture-dew  drops  falh 
We  have  our  fands  and  ferpents,  tents  and  Ihrowds; 

Alas !  our  murmurings  come  not  laft. 

But  where's  the  duller?  where 's  the  tafte  ) 
Of  mine  inheritance  ?  Lord,  if  I  muft  borrow, 
Let  me  as  well  take  up  their  joy,  as  forrow. 

Bat  can  he  want  the  grape,  who  hath  the  wine  ? 

I  have  their  fruit  and  more. 
BleiTed  be  God,  who  profper'd  Noahs  vine. 

And  made  it  bring  forth  grapes  good  (lore. 

But  much  more  him  I  muft  adore, 
Who  of  the  laws  fowre  juice  fweet  wine  did  make, 
Er'n  God  himfelf,  being  prefled  for  my  fake. 


%   Love  unknown. 

DEare  Friend,  fit  down,  the  tale  is  long  and  fad : 
And  in  my  faintings  I  prefume  your  loue 
Will  more  compile,  then  help.  A  Lord  I  had. 
And  have,  of  whom  fome  grounds  which  may  im- 
I  hold  for  two  lives,  aud  both  lives  in  me.     (prove. 
To  him  I  brought  a  difh  of  fruit  one  day. 
And  in  the  middle  plac'd  xay  heart.    But  he 

(  I  figh  to  fay  ) 
F  Lookt 


122  The  Church. 

Lookt  on  a  feruant,  who  did  know  his  eye 
Better  then  you  know  me,  or  (  which  is  one  ) 
Thenlmyfelf.  TheTervantinftantly 
Quitting  the  fruit ,  feiz'd  on  my  heartalonc, 
And  threw  it  in  a  font,  wherein  did  fall 
A  ftream  of  bloud,  which  ilTu'd  from  the  fide 
Of  a  great  rock:  I  well  remember  all , 
And  have  good  caufe :  there  it  was  dipt  and  di'd, 
And  walht,  and  wrung:  the  very  wringing  yet 
Enforceth  tears.     Tour  heart  was  foul.  If  tar. 
Indeed  'tis  true.  I  did  and  do  commit 
Many  a  fault  more  then  my  leafe  will  bear; 
Yet  ftill  askt  pardon,  and  was  not  deni'd. 
But  you  Ihall  heare.   After  my  heart  was  well, 
And  clean  and  fair,  as  I  one  even- tide 

(IfightoteU) 
Walkt  by  my  felf  abroad,  I  faw  a  large 
And  fpacious  fornace  flaming,  and  thereon 
A  boyling  caldron,  round  about  whofe  verge 
Was  in  great  letters  fet  AFFLICTION. 
The  greatnefie  ftiew'd  the  owner.  So  I  went 
To  fetch  a  facrifice  out  of  my  fold, 
Thinking  with  that,  which  I  did  thus  prefent. 
To  warm  his  love,  which  I  did  fear  grew  cold. 
But  as  my  heart  did  tender  it,  the  man 
Who  was  to  take  it  from  me,  flipt  his  hand. 
And  threw  my  heart  into  the  fcalding  pan; 
My  heart,  that  brought  it  ( do  you  underftand? ) 
The  offerers  heart.   Tour  heart  was  bard,  I  fiar. 
Indeed  'tis  true.  I  found  a  callous  matter 
Began  to  fpread  and  to  expatiate  there: 
But  with  a  richer  drug,  then  fcalding  water, 
I  bath'd  it  often,  ev'n  with  holy  bloud. 
Which  at  a  board,while  many  drunk  bare  wine, 
A  friend  did  fteal  into  my  cup  for  good, 
Ev'n  taken  inwardly  ,  and  moll  divine 


To 


The  Church.  123 

To  lupple  hardnefles.  But  at  the  length 
Out  of  the  caldron  getting,  foon  I  fled 
Unto  my  houfe,  where  to  repair  the  ftrengtli 
Which  I  had  loft,  I  hafted  to  my  bed. 
But  when  I  thought  to  fleep  out  all  thefe  faults 

(  I  figh  tofpeak  ) 
I  found  that  fome  had  ftuff'd  the  bed  with  thoughts, 
I  would  fay  thorns.  Deare,  could  my  heart  not  break. 
When  with  my  pleafures  ev'n  my  reft  was  gone  ? 
Full  well  I  underftood,who  had  been  there: 
For  I  had  giv'n  the  key  to  none,  but  one: 
It  muft  be  he.     Your  heart  was  dull,  I  fear. 
Indeed  a  flack  and  fleepie  ftate  of  minde 
Did  oft  poflelTe  me.fo  that  when  I  pray'd, 
Though  my  lips  went,  my  heart  did  ftay  behinde. 
But  alt  my  fcores  weie  by  another  paid, 
Who  took  the  debt  upon  him.  Truly,  Friend, 
For  ought  I  heare,your  Majler  JhotBs  to  jou 
More  favour  then  you  wot  of.  Mark  the  end. 
The  Font  didonely,what  was  old,  renew  : 
The  Caldron  fuppled,  what  was  grown  too  hard: 
The  Thorns  did  quicken,  what  was  grown  too  dull: 
Alldidbutjlriveto  mend,  what  you  hadmarr'd. 
Wherefore  be  cheer' d,  andpraije  him  to  the  full 
Each  day,  each  houre,  each  moment  of  the  week. 
Who  fain  would  have  you  be,  new,  tender,  quick.        ' 


^    Mans  medley. 


H' 


'Eark,  how  the  birds  do  fing. 

And  woods  do  ring. 
All  creatures  have  their  joy:  and  man  hath  his. 
Yet  if  we  rightly  meafure, 

Mans  joy  and  pleafure 
Rather  hereafter,  then  in  prefent,  is. 

F  2  To 


1 24  T^he  Church. 

To  this  life  things  of  fenfe 

Make  their  pretence: 
In  th'olher  Angels  have  a  right  by  birth: 
Man  ties  them  both  alone. 

And  makes  them  one, 
With  th'one  hand  touching  heav'n,with  th'other  earth. 

In  foul  he  mounts  and  flies, 
In  flcfli  he  dies. 
He  wears  a  ftuffe  whofe  thread  iscourfe  and  round. 
But  trimm'd  with  curious  lace. 
And  fliould  take  place 
After  the  triraming.not  the  ftuife  and  ground. 

Not,  that  he  may  not  here 
Taftc  of  the  cheer. 
But  as  birds  drink,  and  llraight  lift  up  their  head , 
So  mutt  he  fip  and  think 
Of  better  drink 
He  may  attain  to,  after  he  is  dead. 

But  as  his  joyes  are  double ; 
So  is  his  trouble. 
He  hath  two  winters,  other  things  but  one: 
Both  frolls  and  thoughts  do  nip. 
And  bite  h.slip; 
And  he  of  all  things  fears  two  deaths  alone. 

Yet  ev'n  the  greateft  griefs 
May  be  reliefs. 
Could  he  but  take  them  right,  and  in  their  wayes. 
Happie  is  he,  whofe  heart 
Hath  found  the  art 
To  turn  his  double  pains  to  double  praife. 

fThc 


The  Church.  1125 

m    The  Storm. 

IF  as  the  windes  and  waters  here  below 
Do  flie  and  flow. 
My  fighs  and  tears  as  bufie  were  above; 

Sure  they  would  move 
And  much  affeft  thee ,  as  tempelluous  times 
Amaze  poore  mortals,  and  objedl  their  crimes. 

Starres  have  their  ftorms,ev'n  in  a  high  degree , 
As  well  as  we. 

A  throbbing  confcience  fpurred  by  remorfe 

Hath  a  ftrange  force: 

It  quits  the  earth,  and  mounting  more  and  more. 

Dares  to  aiTault  thee,  and  befiege  thy  doore. 

There  it  ftands  knocking,  to  thy  muficks  wrong. 
And  drowns  the  fong. 

Glorie  and  honour  are  fet  by  till  it 

An  anfwerget. 

Poets  have  wrong'd  poore  dorms:  fuch  dayes  arc  bed; 

They  purge  the  aire  without,  within  the  breaft. 


^    Paradife. 

IBlefle  thee,  Lord ,  becaufe  I  g  r  o  w 
Among  thy  trees ,  which  in  a  row 
To  thee   both  fruit  and  order  o  w. 

What  open  force,  or  hidden  charm 
Can  blaft  my  fruit,  or  bring  me  harm. 
While   the   inclofure   is   thine    a  r  m? 


F  5  Inclofc 


I 


126  T^he  Church. 

Inclofe  me  ftill  for  fear  I  start. 
Be  to  me  rather  (harp  and  tart, 
Then  let  me  want  thy  hand  &  a  r  t  . 

When  thou  doft  greater  judgements  (fare, 
And  with  thy  knife  but  prune  and  pare, 
Ev'n   fruitful!  trees  more    fruitfull    are. 

Such  fliarpnes  (hows  the  fweeteft  p  r  e  n  d  : 
Such  cuttings  rather  heal  then  rend: 
And  fuch  beginnings  touch  their   end. 


^    The  Method. 


JL  Oore  heart,  lament. 
For  fince  thy  God  refufeth  ftill. 
There  is  fome  rub,  feme  difcontent, 

Which  cools  his  will. 

Thy  Father  «»W 
Quickly  effeft,  what  thou  doft  move; 
Yo^\\t\i  Power :  and  fure  hetoould: 

For  he  is  Love. 

Go  fcarch  this  thing, 
Tumble  thy  breaft,  and  turn  thy  book. 
If  thou  hadft  loft  a  glove  or  ring, 

Wouldft  thou  not  look  f 

What  do  I  fee 
Written  above  there?  Tefterdaj 
1  did  behavt  me  carelejly. 

When  1  did  pray. 


And 


The  Church.  127 

And  fhould  Gods  eare 
To  fuch  indifferents  chained  be, 
Who  do  not  their  own  motions  heare  i 

IsGodleffefreef 

But  ftayl  what's  there? 
Late  tabea  J  toould  bavefometbing  done, 
I  had  a  motion  to  forbear. 

Yet  1  went  on. 

And  fhould  Gods  eare. 
Which  needs  not  man,  be  ty'd  to  thofe 
Who  heare  not  him,  but  quickly  heare 

His  utter  foes? 

Then  once  more  pray: 
Down  with  thy  knees,  up  with  thy  voice. 
Seek  pardon  firft,  and  God  will  fay,  ' 

Glad  heart  rejoyce. 


^  Divinltie. 

AS  men,  for  fear  the  ftarres  fhould  fleep  and  nod, 
And  trip  at  night,  have  fpheres  fuppli'd; 
A»  if  a  flarre  were  duller  then  a  clod. 

Which  knows  his  way  without  a  guide: 

Juft  fo  the  other  heav'n  they  alfo  ferve. 

Divinities  tranfcendent  skie: 
Which  with  the  edge  of  wit  they  cut  and  carve. 

Reafon  triumphs,  and  faith  lies  by. 

Could  not  that  wifdome,  which  firft  broacht  the  wine, 
Have  thicken'd  it  with  definitions.' 

And  jagg'd  his  feamlelTe  coat,  had  that  been  fine, 
With  curious  quettions  and  divifions? 

F4  But 


128  rbe  Church. 

But  all  the  doarine,  which  he  taught  and  gave, 

ii  ^^^ '^'^"^  ^^ '"^^^'"' ^'■°™  ^'^^"^^^  "  came. 
At  leaft  thofe  beams  of  truth,  which  onely  fave, 
Surpaffe  in  brightneiTe  any  flame. 

Love  God^ndlove  pur  neighbour.  Watch  and  fray. 

\Do  as  ye  would  be  done  unto. 
O  dark  inftruftions;  ev'n  as  dark  as  day! 

Who  can  thefe  Gordian  knots  undo? 

But  he  doth  bid  us  take  his  bloud  for  wine. 

B'dwhathep]eafe;yetlamfure, 
To  take  and  tafte  what  he  doth  there  defigne, 

Is  all  that  favcs,  and  not  obfcurc. 

Then  burn  thy  Epicycles,  foolifh  man; 

Break  all  thy  fpheres,  and  fave  thy  head. 
F«jth  needs  no  ftaffe  of  fleih,  but  ftoutly  can 

To  heav'n  alone  both  go,  and  leade. 


Ephef.  4.  30. 
Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  iSc. 

ANd  art  thou  grieved,  fweet  and  facred  Dorc, 
When  I  am  fowre, 
And  crolTe  thy  love  ? 
Grieved  for  me?  the  God  of  flrength  and  power 
Griev'd  for  a  worm,  which  when  I  tread, 
I  pafle  away  and  leave  it  dead? 


I 


TilCM 


The  Cburcb.  129 

Then  weep  mine  eyes,  the  God  of  love  <io<h  grie  v  c : 
Weep  foolifh  heart. 
And  weeping  live; 
for  death  i«  dricasduft.  Yet  if  ye  part. 
End  as  the  night,  whofe  fable  h*e 
YourfinnesexpreiTe;  melt  into  dew. 

When  iawcie  mirth  fhall  knock  or  call  atdoorc. 
Cry  out.  Get  hence, 
Or  cry  no  more. 
Almightie  God  doth  grie ve,he  puts  oaienic: 
I  finne  not  to  my  grief  alone. 
But  to  my  Gods  tooj  he  doth  grone. 

Oh  take  thy  lute,  and  tunc  it  to  a  ftrtin, 
Which  may  with  thee 
All  day  complain. 
There  can  nodifcord  butin  ceaflng  be. 

Marbles  can  weep;  and  furely  Ariags 
More  bowel*  have,  then  fuch  hard  ihmfj. 

Lord, I  adjudge  my  iiclf  to  tears  aad  grief, 
Ev'nendle He  tears 
Without  relief. 
If  a  cleare  rpring  for  rae  no  time  forbears. 
But  runnes,  although  I  be  not  drie; 
I  aoi  no  Cryftall,  what  ihall  I? 

Yet  if  I  wail  not  ftill,  finee  ftiU  to  wail 
Nature  denies; 
And  flefh  would  fail, 
if  my  defcrts  weremaftersof  mineeye!-. 

Lord,  pardon,  for  thy  fonne  makes  go*d 
My  want  of  tears  with  (lore  of  blo«<i, 


5        -irTv^^ 


130  T^he  Church. 

IF  The  Familie. 

W  Hat  doth  this  noife  of  thoughts  within  ray  heart 
As  if  they  had  a  part? 
What  do  thefe  loud  complaints  and  pulling  fears. 
As  if  there  were  no  rule  or  eares? 


But,  Lord,  the  houfe  and  familie  are  thine, 
Though  fome  of  them  repine. 
Turn  out  thefe  wranglers,  which  defile  thy  feat: 
For  where  thou  dwelleft  all  is  neat. 

Firft  Peace  and  Silence  all  difputcs  controll. 

Then  Order  plaies  the  foul; 
And  giving  all  things  their  fet  forms  and  hourcs. 
Makes  of  wilde  woods  fweet  walks  and  bowres. 

Hurabk  Obedience  neare  the  doore  doth  (land, 

Expelling  a  command: 

Then  whom  in  waiting  nothing  feems  more  flow. 

Nothing  more  quick  when  fhe  doth  go.  . 

Joyes  oft  are  there,  and  griefs  as  oft  as  joyes; 

Butgriefs  without  a  noife: 
Yet  fpeak  they  louder,  then  diftemper'd  fears. 
What  is  fo  fhrill  as  filent  tears? 

This  is  thy  houfe,  with  thefe  it  doth  abound: 
And  where  thefe  are  not  found. 
Perhaps  thoucom'ftfometimes,andforaday; 
But  not  to  make  a  conllant  ftay. 


^  The 


The  Church.  131 

%  The  Size. 

V^Ontent  thee,  greedie  heart. 
Modeft  and  moderate  joyes  to  thofe,  that  have 
Title  to  more  hereafter  when  they  part. 
Are  palling  brave. 
Let  th'  upper  fprings  into  the  low 
Defcend  and  fall,  and  thou  doil  flov\7. 

What  though  fome  have  a  fraught 
Of  cloves  and  nutmegs,  and  in  cinamon  fail; 
if  thou  haft  wherewithal!  to  fpiee  a  draught. 
When  griefs  prevail; 
And  for  the  future  time  artheir 

To  th'  Ifle  of  fpices?  Is't  not  fair? 

t   "^ 

To  be  in  both  worlds  full 
^s  more  then  God  was,  who  was  hungrie  here. 
■Vouldft  thou  his  laws  of  fafting  difanull? 
Enaft  good  cheer? 
Lay  out  thy  joy,  yet  hope  to  fave  it? 
Wouldft  thou  both  eat  thy  cake,  and  have  it' 

Great  joyes  are  all  at  once; 
"^  jt  little  do  referve  themfelves  for  more: 
hofe  have  their  hopes;thefe  what  they  have  renounce, 
And  live  on  fcore: 
Thofe  are  at  home;  thefe  journey  ftill. 
And  meet  the  reft  on  Sions  hill. 

Thy  Saviour  fentenc'd  joy, 

\ndin  the  flelh  condemn'd  it  as  unfit. 

At  leaftinlump:  for fuch  doth  oft  deftroy; 

Whereas  a  bit 

Doth  tice  us  on  to  hopes  of  more. 

And  for  the  prefent  health  reftore. 


132  The  Church. 

A  CKriftians  (late  and  cafe 
)  i  not  a  corpulent,  but  a  thitine  and  fpare. 
Yet  t&vft  ftrength:  whofc  long  and  bonie  face 
Conteiit  and  care 
Do  feetn  to  equally  divide. 
Like  a  prttetidcr,not  a  bride. 

Wherefore  fit  down,  good  heart; 

Grafp  not  at  much,  for  fczx  thou  lofefl  all. 

If  comforts  fell  according  to  defert, 

They  would  great  frofts  and  fnows  deftroy : 
For  wc  ftiould  count,Since  the  laft  joy. 

Xhcn  clofe  again  thefcam. 
Which  thou  haft  open'd  :  do  not  fpread  thy  robe 
In  hope  of  great  things.  Call  to  rainde  thy  dream. 
An  earthly  globe. 
On  whofe  meridian  was  engraven, 
Tbt/e  ft  as  are  tears, and  heavn  the  haven. 


^  Artillerie. 

AS  lone  ev'ningfat  before  my  cell. 
Me  thoughts  a  ftarrc  did  flioot  into  my  lap. 
I  rofe.and  (hook  my  clothes.as  knowing  well. 
That  from  fmall  fires  comes  oft  not  fmall  mi(hap. 
When  fuddenlyl  heard  one  fay, 
*Z)«  as  thou  ufeji,  difoiey, 
Expell  good  motions  f rem  thy  breaft. 
Which  have  the  face  offre,hut  end  in  reft. 


T'be  Cburcb.  1 3  j 


, 


[,  who  had  he»rd  of  mufick  in  the  fpheres. 
But  not  of  fpecch  in  ftarres,  began  to  mufe: 
But  turning  to  my  God.whofeminifterj 
The  ftarres  and  all  things  are;  If  I  refufe. 
Dread  Lord.faid  I,fo  oft  my  good; 
Then  I  refufe  not  ev'n  with  bloud 
Towafli  away  myftubborn  thought; 
For  I  will  do,  or  fufier  what  I  ought. 

But  I  have  alfo  ftarres  and  fhooters  too. 
Corn  where  thy  fervants  both  artilleries  tife. 
My  tears  and  prayers  night  and  day  do  wooe, 
And  work  up  to  thee;  yet  thou  doft  refufe. 
Not,  but  I  am  ( I  muft  fay  ftill  ) 
Much  more  oblig'd  to  do  thy  will. 
Then  thou  to  grant  mine:  but  becaule 
Thy  promife  now  hath  ev'n  fct  thee  thy  laws. 

Then  we  are  (hooters  both, and  thou  doft  deigne 
To  enter  combate  with  us,  and  conteft 
With  thine  own  day.  But  I  would  parley  fain: 
Shunnc  not  my  arrows,  and  behold  my  breaft. 

Yet  if  thou  ftiunneft,  I  am  thine: 

I  muft  be  fo,  if  I  am  mine. 

There  is  no  articling  with  thee: 
I  am  but  finite,  yet  thine  infinitely. 


Church 


134  '^"'^^  Church. 

^   Church-rents  and  fchifmes. 

BRave  rofe,  ( alas!  )  where  art  thou?  in  the  chair 
Where  thou  didft  lately  fo  triumph  and  ihine, 
A  worm  doth  fit,  whole  many  feet  and  hair 
Are  the  more  foul,  the  more  thou  wert  divine. 
This,  this  hath  done  it,  this  did  bite  the  root 
And  bottomeof  the  leaves:  which  when  the  winde 
Did  once  perceive,  it  blew  them  underfoot. 
Where  rude  unhallow'd  fteps  do  cru(h  and  grindc 
Their  beauteous  glories.  Onely  flircdsof  thee, 
And  thofe  all  bitten,  in  thy  chair  I  fee. 

Why  doth  my  Mother  blufh?  is  fhe  the  rofe. 
And  fhowsitfo?  Jndeed  Ch.ifts  precious  bloud 
Gave  you  a  colour  once;  which  when  your  foes 
Thought  to  let  out,  the  bleeding  did  you  good, 
And  made  you  look  much  freflier  then  before. 
But  when  debates  and  fretting  jealoufies 
Did  worm  and  work  within  you  more  and  more, 
Your  colour  faded,  and  calamities 

Turned  your  ruddie  into  pale  and  bleak: 
Your  health  and  beautie  both  began  to  break. 

Then  did  your  fev'rall  parts  unloofe  and  ftart: 
Which  when  your  neighbours  faw.likea  north-winde, 
They  rufhed  in, and  call  them  in  the  dirt 
Where  Pagans  tread,  O  Mother  deareand  kinde, 
Where  fliall  1  get  me  eyes  enough  to  weep, 
As  many  eyes  as  ftarres?  fince  it  is  night. 
And  much  of  Afiaand  Europe  faft  aflecp. 
And  ev'n  all  Africk;  would  at  leatl  I  might 

With  thefe  two  poore  ones  lick  up  all  the  dew. 
Which  falls  by  night,and  poure  it  out  for  you! 

IF  Juftice. 


The  Church.  i^^ 

f  Juftice. 

ODreadfull  Jullicc,what  a  fright  and  terrour 
Waft  thou  of  old. 
When  finne  »nd  errour 
Did  fhow  and  fliape  thy  looks  to  me. 
And  through  their  glafle  difcolour  thee! 
He  that  did  but  look  up,  was  proud  and  bold. 

The  didies  of  thy  ballance  feem'd  to  gape. 
Like  two  great  pits; 
The  beam  and  Icapc 
Did  likefome  tort'ring  engine  fliow: 
Thy  hand  above  did  burn  and  glow, 
Danting  the  llouteft  hearts,  the  proudeft  wits. 

But  now  that  Chrifts  pure  vail  prefents  the  fight, 
I  fee  no  fears: 
Thy  hand  is  white. 
Thy  fcales  like  buckets,which  attend 
And  interchangeably  defcend  , 
Lifting  to  heaven  from  this  well  of  tears. 

For  where  before  thou  ftill  didft  call  on  me. 
Now  I  ftill  touch 
And  harp  on  thee. 
Gods  promifes  have  made  thee  mine; 
Why  ihould  I  juftice  now  decline  ' 
Againft  me  there  is  nonc,but  for  mc  much. 


^  The  Pilgrimage. 

ITravell'd  on.feeing  the  hill,  where  lay 
My  expetlatton. 
A  long  it  was  and  weary  way. 
The  gloomy  cave  of  Defperation 
I  left  on  th'  one,  and  on  the  other  fide 

The  rock  of  Pride.         And 


136 


Tbe  Church. 


And  fo  I  came  to  phanfies  medow  flrow'd 

With  many  a  flower: 
Fain  would  I  here  have  made  abode. 
But  I  was  quicken'd  by  my  boure. 
So  to  c«re$  cops  I  came,and  there  got  through 
With  much  ado. 

That  led  me  to  the  wilde  of  paiiion,which 
Some  call  the  wold; 
A  wafted  place,  but  fometimes  rwh. 
Here  I  was  robb'd  of  all  my  gold, 
Save  one  good  Angell,  which  a  friend  had  ti'd 
Clofetomy  &de. 

At  length  I  got  unto  the  gladfome  hill, 

Where  lay  my  hope. 
Where  lay  my  heart;and  climbing  ftill, 
When  I  had  gain'd  the  brow  and  top, 
A  lake  of  brackifh  waters  on  the  ground 
Was  all  I  found. 

With  that  aba(h*d  and  firuck  with  many  a  Ring 
Of  fwarming  fears, 
I  fell,  and  cry'd,  Alas  my  King; 
Can  both  the  way  and  end  be  tears^ 
Yet  taking  heart  I  rofe,  and  then  pcrceiv'd 
I  wasdecciv'd: 

My  hill  was  further:  fo  I  flung  away. 

Yet  heard  aerie 
Juft  as  I  wcnt,Nenigees  that  way 
And  lives  :  If  that  beall,faidl. 
After  fo  foul  a  journey  death  is  fair, 
And  but  a  chair. 

HThe 


o-\' 


The  Church.  137 

f  The  Holdfaft. 

ITKreatned  to  obferve  the  ftrift  decree 
Of  my  deare  God  with  all  my  power  &  might.  ' 
But  I  was  told  by  one,  it  could  not  be  ; 
Yet  I  might  truft  in  God  to  be  my  light. 

Then  will  I  truft,jai£l]in  him  alone.  <ir 

Nay,  ev'n  to  mnTm  him, was  alfo  his:  >  ^<*<\ 

We  muft  confefle,that  nothing  is  our  own. 

Then:I  confeffe  that  he  myfuccouris: 

But  to  have  nought  is  ours,  not  to  confefle 

That  we  have  nought.  I  flood  amaz'd  at  this, 

Much  troubled,  till  I  heard  a  friend  expreffe,  ^a^)„ ,  .*i 

That  all  things  were  more  ours  by  being  his.  f^,-  ,n^^, 

What  Adam  had,  and  forfeited  for  all, 

Chrift  keepeth  now,who  cannot  fail  or  fall. 


^    Complaining. 

DO  not  beguile  my  heart, 
Becaufe  thou  art 
My  power  and  virifdome.  Put  me  not  to  {hame, 
Becaufe  I  am 
Thy  clay  that  weeps,  thy  duft  that  call*. 

Thou  art  the  Lord  of  glorie ; 
The  deed  and  ftorie 
Are  both  thy  due:  but   I  a  filly  flie, 
That  live  or  die 
According  as  the  weather  falls. 

Art  thou  all  juftice,  Lord? 

Shows  not  thy  word 
More  attributes?  Am  I  all  throat  or  eye, 
To  weeporcrie? 
Have  I  no  parts  but  thofe  of  grief? 

L«t 


138  The  Church. 

Let  not  thy  wrathfull  power 
Afflift  my  houre. 
My  inch  of  life:  or  let  thy  gracious  power 
ContraiSmy  houre, 
That  I  may  climbe  and  finde  relief.  | 

il    The  Difcharge. 

BUfie  enquiring  heart,  what  wouldft  thou  know?  [ 
Why  doft  thou  prie. 
And  turn,  and  leer,  and  with  a  licorous  eye 
Look  high  and  low ; 
And  in  thy  lookings  ftretch  and  grow? 

Haft  thou  not  made  thy  counts,  and  fumm'd  up  all  ^ 

Did  not  thy  heart 
Give  up  the  whole,  and  with  the  whole  depart  ? 
Let  what  will  fall: 
That  which  is  paft  who  can  recall? 

Thy  life  is  Gods,  thy  time  to  come  is  gone. 
And  is  his  right. 
He  is  thy  night  at  noon:  he  is  at  night 

Thy  noon  alone. 
The  crop  is  his,  for  he  hath  fown. 

And  well  it  was  for  thee,  when  this  befell. 

That  God  did  make 
Thy  bufinefle  his,  and  in  thy  life  partake: 

For  thou  canft  tell. 
If  it  be  his  once,all  is  well. 

Oaely  the  prefent  is  thy  part  and  fee. 

.  And  happy  thou. 
If,  though  thou  didft  not  beat  thy  future  brow. 
Thou  couldft  well  fee 
What  prefent  things  requir'd  of  thee. 

They 


7 he  Church.  1 39 

They  ask  enough;  why  (houldft  thou  further  gof 
Raife  not  the  mudde 

Of  future  depths,  but  drink  the  cleare  and  good. 
Dig  not  for  wo 
In  times  to  come;  for  it  will  grow. 

Man  and  the  prefent  fit:  if  he  provide. 

He  breaks  the  fquare. 

This  houre  is  mine:if  for  the  next  I  care, 

I  grow  too  wide. 
And  do  encroach  upon  deaths  fide. 

For  death  each  houre  environs  and  furrounds. 

He  that  would  know 
And  care  for  future  chances,  cannot  go 

Unto  thofe  grounds, 
Butthrougha  Church-yard  which  thebouds. 

Things  prefent  (hrink  and  die:  but  they  that  fpend 
"^   "^  Their  thoughts  and  fenfe 

On  future  grief,  do  not  remove  it  thence. 
But  it  extend , 
And  draw  the  bottome  out  an  end. 

God  chains  the  dog  till  night:  wilt  loofe  the  chain, 
And  wake  thy  forrow? 

Wilt  thou foreftall  it.and  now  grieve  to  morrow, 
And  then  again 
Greive  over  freftily  all  thy  pain? 

Either  grief  will  not  come:  or  if  it  muft. 
Do  not  forecaft. 
And  while  itcomcth,it  isalmoftpaft. 
Away  diftruft: 
Mv  God  hath  promis'd,he  is  juft. 
'  n  Praife. 


h 


I40  7 be  Church. 

f    Praife. 

King  of  Glorie,  King  of  Peace, 
I  will  love  thee: 
And  that  love  may  never  ceafe, 

I  will  move  thee. 

Thou  haft  granted  my  requeft, 

Thou  haft  heard  me: 

Thou  didft  note  my  working  breaft. 
Thou  haft  fpar'd  me. 

Wherefore  with  my  utmoft  art 
I  will  iing  thee, 

And  the  cream  of  all  my  heart 
I  will  bring  thee. 

Though  my  finnes  againft  me  cried, 

Thou  didft  cleare  me; 

And  alone,  when  they  replied. 

Thou  didft  heare  me. 

Sev'n  whole  dayes,  not  one  in  feven, 
I  will  praife  thee. 

I«  my  heart,  though  not  in  heaven, 
I  can  raife  thee. 

Thou  grew'ftfoft  and  moift  with  tears. 
Thou  relentedft: 

And  whenjufticecall'd  for  fears. 
Thou  diflentedft. 

Small  it  is,  in  this  poore  fort 

To  enroll  thee : 

Ev'n  eternitie  is  too  ftiort 

To  extoll  thee. 


f   Aa 


The  Church.  141 

f  An  Offering. 

COme,  bring  thy  gift.  If  bleffings  were  as  flow 
As  mens  returns,  what  would  become  of  fools  ? 
What  haft  thou  there?  a  heart?  but  is  it  pure? 
Search  well  and  fee;  for  hearts  have  many  holes. 
Yet  one  pure  heart  is  nothing  to  beftow: 
In  Chrift  two  natures  met  to  be  thy  cure. 

O  that  within  us  hearts  had  propagation. 

Since  many  gifts  do  challenge  many  hearts! 

Yet  one,  if  good,  may  title  to  a  number; 

And  fingle  things  grow  fruitful!  by  deferts. 

In  publick  judgements  one  may  be  a  nation. 

And  fence  a  plague,  while  others  fleep  and  flumber. 

But  all  [  fear  is  left  thy  heart  difpleafe. 
As  neither  good,  nor  one:  fo  oft  divifions 
Thy  lufts  have  made,  and  not  thy  lufts  alone; 
Thy  paffions  alfo  have  their  fet  partitions. 
Thefe  parcell  out  thy  heart:  recover  thefe. 
And  thou  mayft  offer  many  gifts  in  one. 

There  is  a  balfome,  or  indeed  a  bloud,  ( clofc 

Dropping  from  heav'n,  which  doth  both  cleanfe  and 
All  forts  of  wounds;  of  fuch  ftrange  force  it  is. 
Seek  out  this  All-heal,and feek  no  repofe, 
Untill  thou  finde  and  ufe  it  to  thy  good: 
Then  bringthy  gift;and  let  thy  hymne  be  this; 

Since  my  fadnelTe 

Into  gladnelTe 
Lord  thou  doft  convert, 

O  accept 

What  thou  haft  kept, 
As  thy  due  defert. 

'  Had 


142  The  Church . 

Had  I  many. 

Had  I  any, 
(  For  this  heart  is  none  ) 

All  were  thine 

And  none  of  mine: 
Surely  thine  alone. 

Yet  thy  favour 
May  give  favour 

To  this  poore  oblation ; 
And  it  raife 
To  be  thy  praife, 

And  be  my  falvation. 


1   Longing. 

V    V  Ith  fick  and  famifht  cycJ, 
With  doubling  knees  and  weary  bones, 
To  thee  my  cries. 
To  thee  my  grones, 
To  thee  my  fighs,my  tears  afcend: 

No  end? 

My  throat,  my  foul  ishoarfe; 
My  heart  is  wither'd  like  a  ground 

Which  thou  doft  curfe. 
My  thoughts  turn  round, 
And  make  me  giddie;  Lord,  I  fall, 
Yetcill. 

From  thee  all  pitie  flows. 
Mothers  are  kinde,  becaufe  thou  art, 
And  doft  difpofe 
To  them  a  part: 
Their  infants,  them;  and  they  fuck  thee 
More  free. 


T^he  Church.  143 


Bowels  of  pitie,  heare! 
Lord  of  my  foul,  love  of  my  minde, 

Bow  down  thine  eare'. 

Let  not  the  winde    ~\ 

Scattermy  words,  and  in  the  fame        ] 

Thy  name!  — 

Look  on  my  forrows  round! 
Mark  well  my  furnace !  O  what  flames. 
What  heats  abound! 
What  griefs,  what  fhames ! 
Confider,  Lord;  Lord,  bow  thineeare. 
And  heare  I 

Lord  Jefu,  thou  didft  bow 
Thy  dying  head  upon  the  tree: 
O  be  not  now 
More  dead  to  me ! 
Lord  heare  I  Shall  be  that  made  the  eare. 
Not  heare  f 


Behold,  thy  duft  doth  ftirrc, 
1 1  moves,  it  creeps,  it  aims  at  thee: 
Wilt  thoudeferre 
To  fuccour  me, 
Thy  pile  of  duft,  wherein  each  crumme* 
Sayes,  Come/' 

To  thee  help  appertains. 
Haft  thou  left  ail  things  to  their  courfc. 
And  laid  the  reins 
Upon  the  horfe/ 
'.  tU  lockt?  hath  a  finners  plea 
No  key? 


Itxiced 


144  ^^^  Church. 

Indeed  the  world's  thy  book. 

Where  all  things  have  their  leafe  affign'd: 

Yet  a  meek  look 

Hath  interlin'd. 

Thy  board  is  full,  yet  humble  guefts 

Finde  ncfts. 

Thou  tarrieft,  while  I  die, 
Aad  fall  to  nothing :  thou  doft  reigne, 

And  rule  on  high. 
While  I  remain 
In  bitter  grief :  yet  am  I  ftil'd 

Thy  childe. 

Lord,didft  thou  leave  thy  throne. 
Not  to  relieve?  how  can  it  be  , 

That  thou  art  grown 
Thus  hard  to  me? 
Were  finne  alive,  good  caufe  there  were 
To  bear. 

But  now  both  finne  is  dead. 
And  all  thy  promiles  live  and  bide. 

That  wants  his  head; 
Thefe  fpeak  and  chide. 
And  in  thy  bofome  poure  my  tears. 
As  theirs. 

Lord  J  E  s  u,  heare  my  heart. 
Which  hath  been  broken  now  fo  long. 
That  ev'rypart 
Hath  got  a  tongue! 
Thy  beggars  grow;  rid  them  away 
To  day. 


My 


The  Church.  i^r 

My  love.my  fwKineffe,  heare! 
By  thefe  thy  feet,  at  which  my  heart 

Lies  ail  the  ys^xt, 
Pluck  out  thy  dart, 
And  heal  my  troubled  breaft  which  cryes. 

Which  dyes. 

1[    The  Bag. 

VWay  defpair;my  gracious  Lord  doth  heare. 
Though  windes  and  w«*ei  aflauit  my  keel, 
Hedoth  preferve  it :  he  doth  fteer, 
Ev'n  when  the  boatfcemi  moft  to  reel. 
Storms  are  the  triumph  of  his  art: 
V.'ell  may  he  clofe  his  eyet,but  not  his  heart. 

Haft  thou  not  heard,  that  my  Lord  Js«t;»  di'd  ? 

Then  let  me  tell  thee  s  ftrange  ftorje. 

The  God  oi  power,  as  he  did  ride 

In  his  majeftick  robei  of  giorie, 

Refol v'd  to  light ;  and  io  one  day 
He  did  defcend,  undrefsing  all  the  way. 

The  ftarres  his  tire  of  light  and  rings  obcain'd. 
The  cloud  his  bow,the  fire  his  fpear. 
The  sky  his  azure  mantie  gain'd. 
And  when  they  ask'd,  what  he  would  wear ; 
He  fmil'd  and  faid  as  he  did  go. 

He  had  new  clothes  a  making  here  below. 

When  he  was  come,  at  travellers  are  wont, 

He  did  repair  unto  an  inne. 

Both  then,and  after,  many  a  brunt 

He  did  endure  to  cancel!  finne: 

And  having  giv'n  the  reft  before, 
Here  he  gave  up  his  life  to  pay  our  fcore. 

G  But 


J  46 


The  Church. 


But  as  be  was  returning,  there  came  one 
That  ran  upon  him  with  3  fpear. 
He,  who  came  hither  all  alone. 
Bringing  nor  man.nor  arms,  nor  fear, 
Receiv'd  the  blow  upon  his  fide. 

And  ftraight  he  turn'd.and  to  his  brethren  cry'd. 

If  ye  have  any  thing  to  fend  or  write, 
(I  have  no  bag, but  here  is  room) 
Unto  my  fathers  hands  and  fight 
(Beleeve  me)  it  (hall  fafely  come. 
That  I  fliall  minde,what  you  impart; 

Look,  you  may  put  it  very  nearc  my  heart. 

Or  if  hereafter  any  of  my  friends 

Will  ufe  me  in  this  kinde,thcdoorc 
Shall  ftill  he  open ;  what  he  fends 
I  will  prefent,and  fomewhat  more, 
Not  to  his  hurt.  Sighs  will  convey 

Any  thing  to  me.  Hcark  defpair,  away. 


%   The  Jews. 

X  Oore  nation,  whofefweet  fap,  and  juice 
Our  cyens  have  purloin'd,  and  left  you  drie: 
Whofeftreams  we  got  by  the  Apoftlesfluce, 
And  ufe  in  baptifme,  while  ye  pine  and  die: 
Who  by  not  keeping  once,  became  a  debter; 
And  now  by  keeping  lofe  the  letter: 

Oh  that  my  prayers!  mine, alas! 
Oh  that  fome  Angel  might  a  trumpet  found; 
At  which  the  Church  falling  upon  her  face 
Should  crie  fo  loud,  untill  the  trump  were  drown'd, 
And  by  that  crie  of  herdeare  Lord  obtain, 

That  your  fweet  fap  might  come  again! 


I 


ne  Church.  i/^y 

f  The  Collar. 

Struck  the  board,  and  cry'd,  No  more. 

I  will  abroad. 

What?  fliall  I  ever  figh  and  pine? 
My  lines  and  life  are  free;  free  as  the  rode, 
Loofe  as  the  winde,  as  large  as  ftore. 

Shall  I  be  ftill  in  fuit? 
Have  I  no  harveft  but  a  thorn 
To  let  me  bloud,  and  not  reftore 
What  I  have  loft  with  cordiall  fruit? 

Sure  there  was  wine 
Before  my  fighs  did  drie  it:  there  was  corn 
Before  my  tears  did  drown  it. 
Is  the  yeare  onely  loft  to  me? 

Have  I  no  bayes  to  crown  it? 
No  flowers,  no  garlands  gay?  all  blafted? 

All  wafted?  ^    _,  -^^^^ 

Notfo,my  heart:  but  there  is  fruit,  ^     -•  '  *^ 

And  thou  haft  hands. 
Recover  all  thy  figh-blown  age 
On  double  pleafures:  leave  thy  cold  difputc 
Of  what  is  fit,  and  not  forfake  thy  cage. 

Thy  rope  of  fands, 
Which  pettie  thoughts  have  made,  and  made  to  thee 
Good  cable,  to  enforce  and  draw. 

And  be  thy  law. 
While  thoudidft  wink  and  wouldft  not  lee. 
Away;  take  heed; 
I  will  abroad. 
Call  in  thy  deaths  head  there:  tie  up  thy  fears. 
He  that  forbears 
To  fuit  and  fcrve  his  need, 

Deferves  his  load. 
But  at  I  rav'd  and  grew  more  fierce  and  wilde 
At  every  word. 
Me  thoughts  I  heard  one  calling,  CbiUe: 

And  I  reply'd,  JM[y  Lor^. 


hB  The  Church. 

^  The  Glimpfe. 

VV  Hither  away  delight? 
Thou  cam'ft  but  now;  wilt  thou  fo  foon  depart* 

And  give  me  up  to  night? 
For  many  weeks  of  lingring  pain  and  fmart 
B'Jt  one  half  houre  of  comfort  for  my  heart? 

Me  thinks  delight  (hould  have 
More  skill  in  mufick,  and  keep  better  time. 

Wert  thou  a  windeor  wave, 
They  quickly  go  and  come  with  lefTer  crime: 
Flowers  look  about,  and  die  not  in  their  prime 

Thy  fliort  abode  and  ftay 
Feeds  not,  but  addes  to  the  defire  of  meat. 

Lime  begg'd  of  old  (  they  fay  ) 
A  neighbour  fpring  to  cool  his  inward  heat; 
Which  by  the  fprings  accefle  grew  much  more  grej 

In  hope  of  thee  my  heart 
Pickt  here  and  there  a  crumme,  and  would  not  die; 

But  conftant  to  his  part 
When  as  my  fears  foretold  this.did  replie, 
A  flender  thread  a  gentle  gueft  will  tie. 

Yet  if  the  heart  that  wept 
Muft  let  thee  go,  return  when  it  doth  knock. 

Although  thy  heap  be  kept 
For  future  times,  the  droppings  of  the  flock 
May  oft  break  forth,  and  never  break  the  lock. 

If  I  have  more  to  fpinnc, 
The  wheel  (hall  go,  fo  that  thy  ftay  be  fhort. 

Thou  knowft  how  grief  and  fmne 
Difturb  the  work.  O  make  me  not  their  fport, 
Who  by  thy  coming  may  be  made  a  court! 

f  Affuranc 


^Ki; 


The  Church,  J  49 

^   Aflurance, 

O  Spitefuil  bitter  thought ! 
crly  fpitefull  thought!  Couldft  thou  invent 
■•igh  a  torture?  Is  fuch  poyfon  bought? 
ibtlefle,  but  in  the  way  of  punilhment, 

When  wit  contrives  to  meet  with  thee. 

No  fuch  rank  poyfon  can  there  be. 

Thou  {aid'ft  but  even  now, 
.at  all  was  not  fo  fair,  as  I  conceiv'd, 
wixt  my  God  and  me;  that  I  allow 
d  coin  large  hopes;  but,  that  I  was  decelv'd: 

Either  the  league  was  broke,  or  neare  it; 

And,  that  I  had  great  caufe  to  fear  it. 

And  what  to  this?  what  more 
luld  poyfon,  if  it  had  a  tongue,  expreffe? 
hat  is  thy  aim?  wouldft  thou  unlock  the  doore 
0  cold  defpairs.and  gnawing  penfiveneffe? 

Wouldft  thou  raife  devils?  I  fee,  I  know, 

I  writ  thy  purpofe  long  ago. 

But  I  will  to  my  Father, 
tio  heard  thee  fay  it.  O  moft  gracioui  Lord, 
ail  the  hope  and  comfort  that  I  gather, 
■  ere  from  my  felf,  I  had  not  half  a  word, 
Not  half  a  letter  to  oppofe 
What  is  ob jetted  by  my  foes. 

But  thou  art  my  deferK 
:.d  in  this  league.which  now  my  foes  invade, 
;iou  art  not  onely  to  perform  thy  part, 
.t  alfo  mine;  as  when  the  league  was  made 
Thou  didft  at  once  thy  felf  indite. 
And  hold  ray  hand,  while  I  did  write. 

G  3  Wherefore 


150  The  Church. 

Wherefore  if  thou  canft  fail. 

Then  can  thy  truth  and  I:  but  while  rocks  ftand. 

And  rivers  ftirre,  thou  canft  not  ftirink  or  quail: 

Vea,  when  both  rocks  and  all  things  fliall  disband. 

Then  (halt  thou  be  my  rock  and  tower, 

And  make  their  ruine  praife  thy  power. 

Now  foolifh  thought  go  on, 

Spin  out  thy  thread,  and  make  thereof  a  coat 

To  hide  thy  (hame:  for  thou  haft  caft  a  bone 

Which  bounds  on  thee,  and  will  not  down  thy  throat: 

What  for  it  felf  love  once  began, 

Now  love  and  truth  will  end  in  man. 


f   The  Call. 

COme.my  Way,  my  Truth,  my  Life: 
Such  a  Way,  as  gives  us  breath: 
Such  a  Truth,  as  ends  all  ftrife: 
And  fuch  a  Life,  as  killeth  death. 

Come,  my  Light,  my  Feaft,  my  Strength: 
Such  a  Light,  as  (hows  a  feaft: 
Such  a  Feaft, as  mends  in  length: 
Such  a  Strength,  as  makes  his  guefi. 

Come,  my  Joy,  my  Love,  my  Heart: 
Such  a  Joy ,  as  none  can  move : 
Such  a  Love,  as  none  can  part: 
Such  a  Heart,  as  joyes  in  love. 


f  Clafpin. 


The  Church,  1 5 1 

%  Clafping  of  hands. 

LOrd,  thou  art  mine ,  and  I  am  thine, 
If  mine  I  am :  and  thine  much  more, 
Then  I  or  ought,  or  can  be  mine. 
Yet  to  be  thine,  doth  me  reftore; 
So  that  again  I  now  am  mine, 
And  with  advantage  mine  the  more. 
Since  this  being  mine,  brings  with  it  thine. 
And  thou  with  me  doft  thee  reftore. 
If  I  without  thee  would  be  mine, 
I  neither  Ihould  be  mine  nor  thine. 

Lord,  I  am  thine,  and  thou  art  mine: 
So  mine  thou  art,  that  fomething  more 
I  may  prefume  thee  mine,  then  thine. 
For  thou  didft  fufFer  to  reftore 
Not  thee,  but  me,  and  to  be  mine: 
And  with  advantage  mine  the  more, 
Since  thou  in  death  waft  none  of  thine. 
Yet  then  as  mine  didft  me  reftore. 

O  be  mine  ftill!  ftill  maice  me  thine! 

Or  rather  make  no  Thine  and  Mine! 


f    Praife. 

LOrd,  I  will  mean  and  fpeak  thy  praife, 
Thy  praife  alone. 
My  bufie  heart  (hall  fpin  it  all  my  dayes : 
And  when  it  ftops  for  want  of  ftore. 
Then  will  I  wring  it  with  a  figh  or  grone, 
That  thou  mayft  yet  have  more. 

G  4  When 


152  The  Church. 

When  thou  doft  favour  any  aflion, 
Itrunnes,  itflies: 
All  things  concurrc  to  give  it  a  perfeftion. 

That  which  had  but  two  legs  before. 
When  thou  doftblefle,hath  twelve:one  whe'el  doth  riffl 
To  twentie  then,  or  more. 

But  when  thou  doft  on  bufinefTe  blow. 
It  hangs,  it  clogs: 
Not  all  th«  teams  of  Albion  in  a  row 

Can  hale  or  draw  it  out  of  doore. 
Legs  are  but  ftumps,  and  Pharaohs  wheels  but  logs. 
And  ftruggling  hinders  more. 

Thou&ods  of  things  do  thee  employ 
In  ruling  all 
This  fpacious  globe:  Angels  muft  have  their  joy. 

Devils  their  rod,  the  fea  his  fhore. 
The  windes  their  ftint:  and  yet  when  I  did  call. 
Thou  heardft  my  call,  and  more. 

I  have  not  loft  one  fingle  tear : 

But  when  mine  eyes 
Did  weep  to  hcav'n,  they  found  a  bottle  itxre 

(  As  we  have  boxes  for  the  poore) 
Rcadie  to  take  them  in;  yet  of  a  fize 

That  would  contain  much  more. 

But  after  thou  hadft  flipt  a  drop 

From  thy  right  eye, 
(Which  there  did  hang  like  ftreamers  nearc  the  top 

Of  fome  fair  church  to  fliow  the  fore 
And  bloudie  battell  which  thou  once  didft  trie  ) 
The  glaffe  was  full  and  more. 

Wherefore 


T be  Church.  153 

Wherefore  I  ftng.  Yet  fince  my  heart, 

Though  prefs'd.runnes  thin; 
O  that  I  might  fomeother  hearts  convert, 

And  fo  take  up  at  ufc  good  (lore: 
That  to  thy  chefts  there  might  be  coming  in 
Both  all  my  praife,  and  more ! 


IF  Jofephs  coat. 

■y  WOunded  I  fing,  tormented  I  indite, 

1  hrown  down  I  fall  into  a  bed,  and  reft : 
Sorrow  hath  chang'd  its  note:  fuch  is  his  will, 
Who  changeth  all  things,  as  him  pleafeth  bell. 

For  well  he  knows,  if  but  one  grief  and  fmart 
Among  my  many  had  his  full  career. 
Sure  it  would  carrie  with  it  ev'n  my  heart. 
And  both  would  runne  untill  they  found  a  biere 

To  fetch  the  bodie;  both  being  due  to  grief. 
But  he  hath  fpoil'd  the  race;  and  giv'n  to  anguifh 
One  of  Joyes  coats,  ticing  it  with  relief 
To  linger  in  me,and  together  languifh. 

I  live  to  (hew  his  power,  who  once  did  bring 

Myjoyej  to  toeep,  and  now  my  grief  no  fing. 


1"  The  Pulley. 


V  V  Hen  God  at  (irft  made  man, 
Having  a  gla(re  of  ble(rings  (landing  by; 
Let  us  Cfaid  he  )  poure  on  him  all  we  can: 
Let  the  worldsriches,  which  difperfed  lie, 
Contra£l  into  a  fpan. 

G  5  So 


154-  The  Church. 

So  ftrength  firft  made  a  way; 
Thenbeiutie  flow'd,  then  wifdome,  honour,plearuf 
When  almoft  ail  was  out,  God  made  a  ftay, 
Perceiving  that  alone  of  all  his  treafure 

Reft  in  the  bottome  lay. 

For  if  1  fliould  (  faid  he  ) 
Beftow  this  Jewell  alfoon  my  creature  , 
He  would  adore  my  gifts  in  (lead  of  me. 
And  reft  in  Nature,  not  the  God  of  Nature. 

So  both  fliould  lofers  be. 

Yet  let  him  keep  the  reft, 
But  keep  them  with  repining  reftlefnefle:  ^ 
Let  him  be  rich  and  wearie,  that  at  leaft. 
If  goodncfle  leade  him  not,  yet  wearinefTe 

May  tofie  him  to  my  breaft. 


f  The  Priefthood. 

BLeft  Order,  which  in  power  doft  fo  exeell. 
That  with  tli'onc  hand  thou  lifteft  to  the  sky. 
And  with  the  other  throweft  down  to  hell 
In  thyjuftcenfures;  fain  would  Idrawnigh, 
Fain  put  thee  on,  exchanging  my  lay-fword 
For  that  of  th'  holy  word. 

But  thou  art  fire,  facred  and  hallow'd  fire; 
And  I  butearthand  clay:ft\ould  I  prefume 
To  wear  thy  habit,  the  fevere  attire 
My  flender compofitions  might  confume. 
Xam  both  foul  and  brittle  ;  much  unfit 
To  deal  in  holy  Writ. 


Yet 


The  Church.  155 

Yet  have  I  often  feen,b/  cunning  hand 
And  force  of  fire,  what  curious  things  are  made 
Of  wretched  earth.  Where  once  I  fcorn'd  to  ftand, 
That  earth  is  fitted  by  the  fire  and  trade 
Ofslcilfull  artilh,  forthe  boardsofthofi; 

Who  make  the  braveft  fhows. 

But  fince  thofe  greatones ,  be  they  ne're  fo  great. 
Come  from  the  earth.from  whence  thofe  vefleh  conie; 
So  that  at  once  both  feeder,di(h,and  meat 
Have  one  beginning  and  one  finallfumme: 
I  do  not  greatly  wonder  at  the  fight, 

If  earth  in  earth  delight. 

But  th'  holy  men  of  God  fuch  veflels  are. 
As  ferve  him  up,  who  all  the  world  commands: 
When  God  vouchfafeth  to  become  our  fare, 
Their  hands  conuey  him,  who  conveys  their  hands. 
O  what  pure  things,  moft  pure  muft  thofc  things  be, 
Who  bring  my  God  to  me  ! 

Wherefore  I  dare  not,  I,  put  forth  my  hand 
To  hold  the  Arlc,  although  it  feem  to  Qiake 
Through  th'old  fi  nnes  and  new  doArines  of  our  land . 
Onely,  lince  God  doth  often  veflels  make 
Of  lowly  matter  for  high  uies  meet, 

I  throw  me  at  his  feet. 

There  will  I  lie,  untill  my  Maker  feek 
For  fome  mean  ftufFe  whereon  to  (how  his  skill: 
Then  is  my  time.  The  diftance  of  the  meek 
Doth  flatter  power.  Left  good  comelhortof  ill 
In  praiilng  might,  the  poore  do  by  fubmiflion 
What  pride  by  oppoiition. 

f  The 


156  The  Church. 

IT   The  Search. 

Y' V^"*""'  O,  whither  art  thou  fled, 

My  Lord,  my  Love  ? 
My  fearches  are  my  daily  bread ; 

Yet  never  prove. 

My  knees  pierce  th'earth,  mine  eics  the  skie; 

■And  yetthefphere 
And  centre  both  to  me  denie 

That  thou  art  there. 

Yet  can  I  mark  hov^  herbs  below 

Grow  green  and  gay, 
A»  if  to  meet  thee  they  did  know, 

While  I  decay. 
Yet  can  I  mark  how  ftarrej  above 

Simper  and  fliine. 
As  having  keyes  unto  thy  love. 

While  poore  I  pine. 

I  fent  a  figh  to  feek  thee  out, 

w     u.L  Deep  drawn  in  pain. 

Wing  d  hke  an  arrow:  but  my  fcout 
Returns  in  vain. 

I  tun'd  another  (  having  ftore) 

Intoagrone; 
Becaufe  the  fearch  was  dumbe  before: 

But  all  was  one. 

Lord.doft  thoufome  new  fabrick  mold 
Which  favour  winnes. 

And  keeps  thee  prefent,  leaving  th' old 
Unto  their  fmnes? 


Where 


The  Church.  1 57 

Wherewmy  God?  what  hidden  place 

Conceals  thee  ftilU 
Wliat  covert  dare  eclipfe  thy  facef 

Is  it  thy  will? 

O  let  not  that  of  any  thing; 

Let  rather  brafle. 
Or  fteel,  or  mountains  be  thy  ring, 

And  I  will  paffe. 

Thy  will  fuch  an  intrenching  is. 

As  pafTeth  thought! 
To  it  all  ftrength,  all  fubtilties 

Are  things  of  nought. 

Thy  will  fuch  a  ftrange  dittance  is. 

As  that  to  it 
Eaft  and  Weft  touch,  the  poles  do  kifle. 

And  parallels  meet. 

Since  then  my  grief  muft  be  as  large. 

As  is  thy  fpace. 
Thy  diftancc  from  me ;  fee  my  charge. 

Lord,  fee  my  cafe. 

O  take  thefe  barres,  thefe  lengths  away ; 

jTurn^nd  reftore  me: 
Be  not  Almightie,  let  me  f*y, 

Againft,  but  for  me. 

When  thou  dotTtufnT^nd  wilt  be  neare; 

^THat  edge  fo  keen, 
What  pointfo  piercing  canappeare 
To  come  between? 

For  as  thy  abfence  doth  excell 

All  diftance  known: 
So  doth  thy  nearenefle  bear  the  bell,  _ 

Making  two  one.  5    Grief 


158 


The  Church. 
t   Grief. 


OWho  will  give  me  tears.'Come  all  ye  fprings, 
Dwell  in  my  head  &  eyes:coine  clouds,&  rain: 
My  grief  hath  need  of  all  the  watry  things, 
That  nature  hath  produc'd.  Let  ev'ry  vein 
Suck  op  a  river  tofupply  mine  eyes. 
My  weary  weeping  eyes  too  drie  for  me, 
UnleUe  they  get  new  conduits,newfupplies 
To  bear  them  out,and  with  my  ftate  agree. 
What  are  two  (hallow  foords,two  little  fpouts 
Of  a  leile  world?  the  greater  is  but  fmall, 
A  narrow  cupboard  for  ray  griefs  and  doubts. 
Which  want  provifion  in  the  midft  of  all. 
Verfe»,ye  are  too  fine  a  thing,  too  wife 
For  my  rough  forrows:  ceafe.be  dumbe  and  mute. 
Give  up  your  feet  and  running  to  mine  eyes, 
And  keep  your  meafures  for  fome  lovers  lute, 
Whofe  grief  allows  him  mulick  and  a  ryme: 
For  mine  excludes  both  meafurejtune,  and  time. 
Alas,  my  God! 


I 


1   TheCroffe. 


w. 


Hat  is  this  ftrange  and  uncouth  thing? 
To  make  me  figh,  and  feek,  and  faint,  and  die, 
Untilllhad  ibme  place, where  Imightfing, 

And  ferve  thee; and  not  onely  I, 
But  all  my  wealth,and  familie  might  combine 
To  fet  thy  honour  up,as  oar  defigne. 


And 


The  Church.  159 

And  then  when  after  much  delay, 
Much  wraftling,many  a  combate,  this  deare  end. 
So  much  defir'd,  isgiv'n,to  take  away 

My  power  to  ferve  thee;  to  unbei>d 
All  my  abilities,  my  defignes  confound, 
And  lay  my  threatnings  bleeding  on  the  ground. 

One  ague  dwelleth  in  my  bonei, 
Another  in  my  foul  (the  memorie 
What  I  would  do  for  thee,if  once  my  gronei 

Could  be  allow'd  for  harmonic) 
1  am  in  all  a  weakdifabled  thing. 
Save  in  the  fight  thereof,  where  ftrength  dothJUn|. 

Befides,things  fort  not  to  my  will, 
Ev'n  when  my  will  doth  ftudiethy  renown: 
Thou  turneft  th'  edge  of  all  things  on  me  ftill. 

Taking  me  up  to  throw  me  down: 
So  that,  ev'n  when  my  hopes  feem  to  be  fped, 
1  am  to  grief  alive,  to  them  as  dead. 

To  have  my  aim,  and  yet  to  be 
Farther  from  it  then  when  I  bent  my  bow ; 
To  make  my  hopes  my  torture,  and  the  fee 

*  Of  all  my  woes  another  wo, 
Is  in  the  midft  of  delicates  to  need, 
And  ev'n  lo  Paradife  to  be  a  weed. 

Ah  my  deare  Father,  eafe  my  fmart! 
Thefe  contrarieties  crufli  mc:  thefe  crofle  a£Uons 
Doc  winde  a  rope  about,  and  cut  my  heart: 

Andyetfince  thefe  thy  contradiftions 
Are  properly  a  crofle  felt  by  thy  fonne, 
With  but  foure  words.my  words.  Thy  will  it  done. 

f  The 


i6o  The  Church. 

\  The  Flower. 

XxOw  frefh,  O  Lord.how  fweet  and  clean 
Are  thy  returns !  ev'n  as  the  flowers  in  fpring; 

To  which,  befides  their  own  demean. 
The  late-paft  frofts  tributes  of  pleafure  bring. 
Grief  melts  away- 
Like  fnow  in  May, 
As  if  there  were  no  fuch  cold  thing. 

Who  would  have  thought  my  (hrivel'd  heart 
Could  have  recover'd  grecnnefle?  It  was  gone 
Quite  under  ground  ;  as  flowers  depart 
To  fee  their  mother-root,  when  they  have  blown ; 
Where  they  together 
All  the  hard  weather, 
Dead  to  the  world,  keep  houfe  unknown. 

Thefe  are  thy  wonders,Lord  of  power 
Killing  and  quickning.bringing  down  to  hell 

And  up  to  heaven  in  an  hourc; 
Making  a  chiming  of  a  paffing-bell. 

We  fay  amifle,     , 
This  or  that  is: 
Xhy  word  is  all,  if  we  could  fpell. 

O  that  I  once  paft  changing  were, 
Faft  in  thy  Paradife,where  no  flower  can  wither! 

Many  a  fpring  I  flioot  up  fair, 
Offrjngat  heav'n,  growing  and  groning  thithen 
Nor  doth  my  flower 
Want  a  fprmg-fliowre, 
My  ftnnes  and  I  joining  together; 


I- 


The  Church.  1 6 1 

But  while  I  grow  in  a  ftrajght  line, 
Still  upwards  bent,  as  if  hcav'n  were  mine  own, 

Thy  anger  comes,  and  I  decline: 
What  froil  to  that?  what  pole  is  not  the  zone, 
Where  all  things  burn, 
Whenthou  doft  turn. 
And  the  leaft  frown  of  thine  is  Ihownj 

And  now  in  age  I  bud  again. 
After  fo  many  deaths  I  live  and  write; 
I  once  more  fmcll  the  dew  and  rain. 
And  reli/h  verfing:  Omy  onely  light. 
It  cannot  be 
That  I  am  he 
On  whom  thy  tempefts  fell  all  night. 

Thefe  are  thy  wonders,Lord  of  love. 
To  make  us  fee  we  are  but  flowers  that  glide: 

Which  when  we  once  can  finde  and  prove. 
Thou  haft  a  garden  for  us,  where  to  bide. 

Who  would  be  more. 
Swelling  through  (lore. 
Forfeit  their  Paradife  by  their  pride. 

IT  Dotage. 

FAlfe  glozing  pleafures.casks  of  happinefle, 
Foolifli  night-fires,womens  and  childrens  wifhes. 
Chafes  in  Arras ,  guilded  emptinefle. 
Shadows  well  mounted,  dreams  in  acaiecr, 
Embroider'd  lyes.nothing  between  two  difhes; 

Thefe  are  the  pleafures  here. 
True  earneft  forrows,  rooted  miferies, 
Anguilh  in  grain,vezations  ripe  and  blown. 
Sure-footed  grieft ,  folid  calamities. 
Plain  demonftrations,  evident  and  cleare. 
Fetching  their  proofs  ev'n  from  the  \cty  bone; 

Thefe  are  the  forrows  here.  But 


1 62  rhe  Church. 

But  oh  the  folly  of  diftrafted  men. 
Who  griefs  in  earneft.joyes  in  jeft  purfue; 
Preferring,  like  brute  beafts,  a  lothfome  den 
Before  a  court,  ev'n  that  above  fo  cleare, 
Where  arc  no  forrows,  but  delights  more  true. 
Then  miferies  are  here! 


^  The  Sonne. 

LEt  forrain  nations  of  their  language  boaft, 
What  fine  varietie  each  tongue  affords: 
1  like  our  language,  as  our  men  and  coaft: 
Who  cannot  drefle  it  well,  want  wit,not  words. 
How  neatly  doe  we  give  one  onely  name 
To  parents  iflue  and  the  funnes  bright  ftarre! 
A  fonne  is  light  and  fruit;  a  fruitful!  flame 
Chafing  the  fathers  dimneffe,carri'd  farre 
From  the  firft  man  in  th'  Eaft.tofrefc  and  new 
Weftern  difcov'ries  of  pofteritie. 
So  in  one  word  our  Lords  humilitie 
We  turn  upon  him  in  a  fenfe  moft  true: 

For  what  Chrift  once  in  humblenefle  began. 
We  him  in  glorie  call.  The  Sonne  of  Man. 


1"  A  true  Hymne. 

iVl  V  joy,  my  life,  my  crown! 
My  heart  was  meaning  all  the  day. 

Somewhat  it  fain  would  fay: 
Andftill  it  runneth  mntt'ring  up  and  down 
With  onely  this,  My  joy,  my  life,  my  crown. 


Yet 


The  Church.  163 

Yet  flight  not  thefe  few  words; 
If  truly  faid,  they  may  take  part 
Among  the  beft  in  art. 
The  finenefle  which  a  hymne  or  pfalme  affords. 
Is,  when  the  foul  unto  the  lines  accord*. 

He  who  craves  all  the  minde, 
And  all  the  foul,  and  ftrength,  and  time, 
If  the  words  onely  ryme, 
Juftly  complains,  that  fomewhat  isbehinde 
To  make  his  verfe,or  write  a  hymne  in  kinde. 

Whereas  if  th'  heart  be  moved. 
Although  the  verfe  be  fomewhat  fcant, 

God  doth  fupplie  the  want. 
As  when  th'  heart  fayes  (fighing  to  be  approved) 
O,  could  I  level  and  flops:  God  writeth,  Zop**/. 


%   TheAnfwer. 

MY  comforts  drop  and  melt  away  likefnow: 
I  (hake  my  head,  and  all  the  thoughts  andendi, 
Wliich  my  fierce  youth  did  bandie,  fall  and  flow 
Like  leaves  about  me;  or  like  fummer  friends, 
Fiycs  of  eftates  and  funne-fliine.  But  to  all, 
'  Vho  think  me  eager,hot,and  undertaking, 
I'.Jtin  my  proiecutions  flack  and  fmall; 
Asa  young  exhalation,  newly  waking. 
Scorns  his  firft  bed  of  dirt,  and  means  the  sky; 
But  cooling  by  the  way,grows  purfie  and  flow. 
And  fetling  to  a  cloud,  doth  live  and  die 
In  that  dark  ftate  of  tears:  to  all,  that  fo 

Show  me.and  fet  me,  I  have  one  reply, 
Which  they  that  know  the  reft,  know  more  then  I. 

^A 


164  The  Church. 

^  A  Dialogue-Antheme. 
Chrijiian.  Death. 

Chr.     A  Las,  poore  Death,  where  is  thy  glorie? 

Where  is  thy  famous  force,  thy  ancient  fting? 
Dea.     Alas  poore  mortall,  voidofftorie. 

Go/pel/and  reade  how  I  have  kiirdtby  King. 
Chr.     Poore  death!  and  who  was  hurt  thereby? 

Thy  curfe  being  laid  on  him.make*  thee  accurft. 

Dea.     Let  lofers  talk:  yet  thou  Jhalt  die;         (worit 

The/e  arms  Jhall  crujb  thee.  Chr.  Spare  not.do  th  . 

I  fhall  be  one  day  better  then  before: 

Thou  fo  much  worfe,that  thou  (halt  be  no  more. 


^  The  Water-courfe. 

THou  who  doft  dwell  and  linger  here  below, 
Since  the  condition  of  this  world  is  frail. 
Where  of  all  plants  afBiftions  foonefi  grow; 
If  troubles  overtake  thee,  do  not  wail: 

For  who  can  look  for  leiTe,  that  loveth  \  ^    5; 

i  Strife. 

But  rather  turn  the  pipe,  and  waters  courfe 
To  ferve  thy  finnes,  and  furnifh  thee  with  ftore 
Of  fov'raigne  tears,  fpringing  from  true  remorfe: 
That  fo  in  purenefle  thou  mayft  him  adore, 

Who  gives  to  man,  as  he  fees  fit  \  Salvation. 

\  Damnation. 

H    Self- 


I 


The  Church.  165 

^   Self-condemnation. 

1  Hou  who  condcmncft  Jewifti  hate, 
For  choofing  Barabbas  a  murderer 
Before  the  Lord  of  glorie; 
Look  back  upon  thine  own  eftate, 
Call  home  thine  eye  ( that  bufie  wanderer  ) 
That  choice  may  be  thy  ftorie. 

He  that  doth  love,  and  love  amifTe 
This  worlds  delights  before  true  Chriftian  joy, 
Hath  njade  a  Jewith  choice: 
The  world  an  ancient  murderer  is; 
Thoufands  of  fouls  it  hath  and  doth  deftroy 
With  her  enchanting  voice. 

He  thathathmadeaforriewedding 
Between  his  foul  and  gold,  and  hath  preferr'd 
Falfe  gain  before  the  true, 
Hath  done  what  he  condemnes  in  reading; 
For  he  hath  fold  for  money  his  deare  Lord, 
And  is  a  Judas-Jew. 

Thus  wc  prevent  the  laft  great  day, 
And  judge  our  felves.  That  light,  which  fin  ipaiSon 
Did  before  dimme  and  choke, 
When  once  thofe  fnuffes  are  ta'nc  away, 
Shines  bright  and  cleare.ev'n  unto  condemnation. 
Without  excufe  or  cloke. 


^  Bitter-fweet. 

AH  my  deare angric  Lord, 
Since  thou  doft  love,  yet  ftrike; 
Call  down,  yet  help  afford; 
Sure  I  will  do  the  like. 


1 66  The  Church. 

I  will  complain,  yet  praife; 
I  will  bewail,  approve: 
And  ail  my  fowre-fweet  daycj 
I  will  lament,  and  love. 


Wi 


%  The  Glance. 


Hen  firft  thy  fweet  and  gracious  eye 
VouchfaPdev'n  in  the  midft  of  youth  and  night 
To  look  upon  me,  who  before  did  lie 
Weltring  in  finne; 
I  feltafugred  ftrange  delight. 
Palling  all  cordials  made  by  any  art. 
Bedew, embalme,  and  overranne  my  heart. 
And  take  it  in. 

Since  that  time  many  a  bitter  ftorm 
My  foul  hath  felt,ev'n  able  to  deftroy. 
Had  the  malicious  and  ill-meaning  harm 
Hisfwingandfway: 
But  rtill  thy  fweet  originall  joy 
Sprung  from  thine  eye,  did  work  within  my  foul, 
And  furging  griefs,  when  they  grew  bold,  control!, 
And  got  the  day. 

If  thy  firft  glance  fo  powerfull  be, 
A  mirth  but  open'd  and  feal'd  up  again; 
What  wonders  fhall  we  feel,  when  we  Ihall  fee 
Thy  full-ey'd  love! 
When  thou  (halt  look  us  out  of  pain,  • 
And  one  afpeft  of  thine  fpend  in  delight 
More  then  a  thoufand  funnes  disburfe  in  light. 
In  heav'n  above. 

II  The 


The  Church.  167 

%  The  23  Pfalme. 

THe  God  of  love  my  fliepherd  is. 
And  he  that  doth  me  feed: 
While  he  is  mine,  and  I  am  his. 
What  can  I  want  or  need? 


He  leads  me  to  the  tender  grafle, 

Where  I  both  feed  and  reft; 

Then  to  the  dreams  that  gently  pafle; 
In  both  I  have  the  befl. 

Or  if  I  ftray,  he  doth  convert 

And  bring  my  minde  in  frame: 

And  all  this  not  for  my  defert, 
But  for  his  holy  name. 

Yea,  in  deaths  fhadie  black  abode 
Well  may  I  wralk,  not  fear: 

For  thou  art  with  me;  and  thy  rod 
To  guide,  thy  llafie  to  bear. 

Nay,  thou  doft  make  me  fit  and  dine, 
Ev'nin  my  enemies  fight: 

My  head  with  oyl,my  cup  with  wine 
Runnes  over  day  and  night. 

Surely  thy  fweet  and  wondrous  love 
Shall  meafure  all  my  dayes; 

And  as  it  never  Ihall  remove. 
So  neither  fhall  my  praife. 


^  Mary 


I 


1 68  The  Church. 

IF  Marie  Magdalene, 

WHen  blefled  Marie  wip'd  her  Saviours  feet, 
(  Whofe  precepts  ihe  had  trampled  on  before) 
And  wore  them  for  a  Jewell  on  her  head, 
Shewing  his  Heps  (hould  be  the  ftreet, 
Wherein  fhe  thenceforth  evermore 
With  penfive  humblenefle  would  live  and  tread: 

She  being  ftain'd  her  felf,  why  did  Ihe  ftrive 

To  make  him  clean,  who  could  not  be  defil'd? 

Why  kept  ftie  not  her  tears  for  lier  own  faults. 
And  not  his  feet?  Though  we  could  dive 
In  tears  like  feas,  our  finnes  are  pil'd 

Deeper  then  they, in  words,  and  works,  and  though; 

Deare  foul,fhe  knew  who  did  vouchfafe  and  deignc 
To  bear  her  filth;  and  that  her  finnes  did  dafh 
Ev'n  God  himfelf :  wherefore  ftie  was  not  loth, 

As  fhe  had  brought  wherewith  to  (lain, 

So  to  bring  in  wherewith  to  wa(h: 
And  yet  in  wafliing  one, (he  waftied  both. 


^   Aaron. 

AlOlinefTe on  the  head. 
Light  and  perfeflions  on  theTireaft, 
Harmonious  bells  below,  raifing  the  dead 
To  leade  them  unto  life  and  reft. 

Thus  are  true  Aarons  dreft. 

Profaneneffe  in  my  head, 
Defefts  and  darknclTe  in  my  breaft, 
A  noife  of  paiTions  ringing  mc  for  dead 
Unto  a  place  where  is  no  reft. 
Poore  prieft  thus  am  I  dreft. 

Onely 


The  Church.  \  69 

Onely  another  head 
I  have,another  heart  and  breaft. 
Another  mufick,  making  live  not  dead, 

Without  whom  I  could  have  no  rc£l: 
In  him  I  am  well  drcft. 

Chrift  is  my  onely  head, 
My  alone  onely  heart  and  brcaft, 
My  onely  mufick,  ftriking  me  ev'n  dead; 
That  to  the  old  man  I  may  reft. 

And  be  in  him  new  drell. 

So  holy  in  my  head, 
Perfcft  and  light  in  my  deare  bread, 
do^rine  tun'd  by  Chrift,  (  who  is  not  dead, 
But  lives  in  me  while  I  do  reft) 

Come  people;  Aaron's  drcft. 


If  The  Odour,  z.Cor.z. 

HOw  fweetlydoth  My  MaJler(oMnA\My  Majier\ 
As  Amber-greefe  Icavesa  rich fcnt 

Untothetafter: 
So  do  thefe  words  a  fweet  content, 
An  orientall  fragrancie.  My  Majler. 

With  thefe  all  day  I  do  perfume  my  minde. 

My  minde  ev'n  thruft  mto  them  both: 

That  I  might  finde 
What  cordials  make  this  curious  broth. 

This  broth  of  fmcUs,  that  feeds  and  fats  my  minde. 

My  Mafttr,  (hall  I  fpeak  >  O  that  to  thee 
Myfervant  were  a  little  fo, 

Asflefhmaybc; 
That  thefe  two  words  might  creep  &  gMwr 
"jfome  degree  offpicinefle  to  thee! 

H  Then 


1 


170  The  Church. 

Then  fliould  the  Pomander,  which  was  before 

A  fpealcing  fweet,  mend  by  reflcftion, 

And  tell  me  more  : 
For  pardon  of  my  imperfeflion 

Would  warm  and  work  it  fwee  ter  then  before. 

For  when  My  Mafter,  which  alone  is  fweet. 

And  ev'n  in  my  unworthineffc  pleafing, 

Shall  call  and  meet, 
Myfervant,  as  thee  not  difpleafing, 

That  call  is  but  the  breathing  of  the  fweet. 

This  breathing  would  with  gains  by  fweetning  me 
(Asfweet  things  traiEck  when  they  meet) 

Return  to  thee. 
And  fo  this  new  commerce  and  fweet 
Shouldall  my  life  employ,  and  bufie  me. 


%   The  Foil. 

If  we  could  fee  below 
The  fphere  of  vertue,and  each  ihining  grace 
As  plainly  as  that  above  doth  fiiow; 
This  were  the  better  skie,the  brighter  place. 

God  hath  made  ftarres  the  foil 
To  fet  off vertues;  griefs  to  fet  off  finning: 

Yet  in  this  wretched  world  we  toil. 
As  if  grief  were  not  foul,  nor  vertue  winning. 

IT  The  Forerunners. 

THe  harbingers  are  come.  See,  fee  their  mark; 
White  is  their  colour,  and  behold  my  head. 
But  muft  they  have  my  brain  ?  muftthey  difpark 
Thofe  fparkling  notions,  which  therein  were  bred  ? 

Muft  dulneffe  turn  me  to  a  clod? 
Yet  have  they  left  me,  Thou  artfiillmy  God. 


T:he  Church.  171 

Good  men  ye  be,  to  leave  me  my  beft  room, 
Ev'n  all  my  heart,  and  what  is  lodged  there: 
I  paffe  not,  I,  what  of  the  reft  become, 
So  Thou  artftillmy  God,  be  out  of  fear.  -^ 

He  will  be  pleafed  with  that  dittie;    | 
And  if  I  pleafe  him,  I  write  fine  and  wittie.        ^ 

Farewell  fweet  phrafes,  lovely  metaphors. 
But  will  ye  leave  me  thus?  when  ye  before 
Of  ftews  and  brothels  onely  knew  the  doores,  _. 

Then  did  I  walh  you  with  my  tears,  and  more,  I 

Brought  you  to  Church  well  dreft  and  ciad^ 
My  God  muft  have  my  beft,  ev'n  all  I  had. 

Louely  enchanting  language,  fugar-cane, 
Hony  of  rofes,  whither  wilt  thou  flie  ? 
Hath  fome  fond  lover  tic'd  thee  to  thy  bane  ? 
And  wilt  thou  leave  the  Church,  and  love  a  ftie  ? 
Fie,  thou  wilt  foil  thy  broider'd  coat. 
And  hurt  thy  felf,and  him  that  fings  the  note. 

Let  foolilh  lovers,  if  they  will  love  dung. 
With  canvas,  not  with  arras  clothe  their  ihame: 
Let  follie  fpeak  in  her  own  native  tongue. 
True  beau  tie  dwells  on  high:  ours  is  aflame 

But  borrow'd  thence  to  light  us  thither. 
Beautie  and  beauteous  words  ftjould  go  together. 

Yet  if  you  go ,  I  pafle  not;  uke  your  way: 
For,  Thou  art  ftillmy  God,  is  all  that  ye 
Perhaps  with  more  embelliftiment  can  fay. 
Go  birds  of  fpring:  let  winter  have  his  fee. 

Let  a  bleak  paleneflc  chalk  the  doore. 
So  all  within  be  livelier  then  before. 

H  2  The 


172  The  Church. 

IF  The  Rofe. 

PRefle  me  not  to  take  more  pleafure 
In  this  world  ai  fugred  Jics. 
And  to  ufe  a  larger  nieafure 

Then  my  ftrift,  yet  welcome  fize. 

Firft,  there  is  no  pleafure  here: 

Colour'd  griefs  indeed  there  are, 

Bluftiing  woes,  that  look  as  cleare 

As  if  they  could  beautie-fparc. 

Qr  if  fuch  deceits  there  be, 

Such  delights  I  meant  to  fay; 

There  are  no  fuch  things  to  me, 

Who  have  pafs'd  my  right  away. 

But  I  will  not  much  oppofe 

Unto  whatyou  now  adrife: 

Oneiy  take  this  gentle  rofe, 

And  therein  myanfwer  lie». 

What  is  fairer  then  a  rofe  ? 

What  is  fweeter?  yet  it  purgeth. 
Purgings  enmitic  difclofe, 

Enmitie  forbearance  urgeth. 

If  then  all  that  worldlings  prize 

Be  contrafted  to  a  rofe; 
Sweetly  there  indeed  it  lies. 

But  it  biteth  In  the  clofe. 

So  this  flower  doth  judge  and  fentence 
Worldly  joyes  to  be  a  fcourgc: 

For  they  ail  produce  repentance. 
And  repentance  is  a  purge. 


The  Church.  173 


But  I  hetlth,  not  phyfickchoofe: 
Oncly  though  I  you  oppofc. 

Say  that  fairly  I  refufe, 

For  ray  anfwer  is  a  rofe. 


IF   Difcipline. 


THrow  away  thy  rod. 
Throw  away  thy  wrath: 

0  my  God, 

Take  the  gentle  path. 

For  my  hearts  defi  re 
Unto  thine  is  bent: 

1  afpire. 
To  I  full  confent. 

Not  a  word  or  look 
I  affea  to  own , 

But  by  book. 
And  thy  book  alone. 

■« 
Though  I  fail,  I  weep: 

Though  I  halt  in  pace. 

Yet  I  creep 
To  the  throne  of  grace.         ^ 

Then  let  wrath  remove; 
Lore  will  do  the  deed : 

For  with  love 
Stonie  hearts  will  bleed./ 

Love  is  fwifi(3t  tooH 
Love's  a  man  of  warre, 

And  canflioot. 
And  can  hit  from  farrc. 

H  3  Who 


174  T^he  Church. 

Who  can  fcape  his  bow? 
That  which  wrought  on  thee. 

Brought  thee  low. 
Needs  muft  work  on  me. 

Throw  away  thy  rod; 
Though  man  fraihies  hath. 

Thou  art  God: 
Throw  away  thy  wrath. 


f   The  Invitation. 

COme  ye  hither  all,  whofe  tafte 
Is  your  wafte; 
Save  your  coft,  and  mend  your  fare. 
God  is  here  prepar'd  and  dreft, 

Andthefeaft, 
God,  In  whom  all  dainties  are. 

Come  ye  hither  all,  whom  wine 

Doth  define. 

Naming  you  not  to  your  good: 

Weep  what  ye  have  drunk  amifle. 
And  drink  this. 

Which  before  ye  drink  is  bloud. 

Come  ye  hither  all,  whom  pain 

Doth  arraigne, 

Bringing  all  your  finnes  to  fight: 

Taftc  and  fear  not:  God  is  here 

In  this  cheer. 

And  on  finne  doth  caft  the  fright. 

Come  ye  hither  all,  whom  joy 

Doth  deftroy, 

While  ye  graze  without  your  bounds: 

Here  is  joy  thatdrowneth  quite 

Your  delight. 

As  a  floud  the  lower  grounds. 


ne  Church.  175 


Come  ye  hither  all,  whofe  love 
Is  your  dove, 

And  exalts  you  to  the  skie: 

Here  is  love,  which  having  breath 
Ev'n  in  death, 

After  death  can  never  die. 

Lord  I  have  invited  all. 

And  I  fhall 

Still  invite,  ftill  call  to  thee  : 

For  it  feems  but  juft  and  right 
In  my  fight. 

Where  is  all,  there  all  fhould  be. 


5[   The  Banquet. 


WElcome  fweet  and  facred  cheer, 
Welcome  deare; 
With  me,  in  me,  live  and  dwell: 
For  thy  neatneffe  paffeth  fxght, 
Thy  delight 
Pafleth  tongue  to  tafte  or  tell. 

O  what  fweetnefle  from  the  bowl 

Fills  my  foul. 
Such  as  is  ,  and  makes  divine! 
Is  fome  ftarre  (fled  from  the  fphere) 

Melted  there. 
As  we  fugar  melt  in  wine  f 

Or  hath  fweetneffe  in  the  bread 

Made  a  head 
To  fubdue  the  fmell  of  finne ; 
Flowers,and  gummes.and  powders  giving 

All  their  living. 
Left  the  enemie  Ihould  winnef 

H  4  Doubt- 


J  76  The  Cburcb. 

DoubtlcBc,  neither  ftarre  nor  flower 

Hath  the  power 

Such  a  fweetncQe  to  impart: 

Oncly  God,  who  gives  perfumes, 

FJefli  aflumes , 

And  with  it  perfumes  ray  heart. 

But  as  Pomanders  and  wood 

Still  are  good, 

Yet  being  bruis'd  are  better  fen tpf];_  i^»,^<A 

God,  to  fliow  how  farre  his  love 

Could  improve. 

Here, as  broken, is  prefented.  j^^-f  f,,jY 

When  I  had  forgot  my  birth. 

And  on  earth 

In  delights  of  earth  was  drown'd; 

God  took  bloud,  and  needs  would  be 
Spilt  with  me. 

And  fo  found  me  on  the  ground. 

Having  rais'd  me  to  look  up. 

In  a  cup 
Sweetly  he  doth  meet  my  tafte. 
But  I  ftill  being  low  and  Ihort, 

Farre  from  court 
Wine  becomes  a  wing  at  laft. 

For  with  it  alone  I  flie 

To  the  skie: 
Where  I  wipe  mine  eyes,and  fee 
What  I  feek,  for  what  I  fue  ; 

Him  I  view. 
Who  hath  done  fomuch  for  me. 


Let 


The  Cburcb.  J77 


Let  the  wonder  of  this  pitie 

Bemy  dittie, 

And  take  ap  my  lines  and  life : 

Hearten  under  pain  of  death. 

Hands  and  breath; 

Strive  in  this,  and  love  the  ftrife. 


^  The  Pofie, 

JL/Et  wits  conteft. 
And  with  their  words  and  pofies  windows  fill: 

Lejfe  then  the  Itafi 
Of  ell  tbj  mercies,  is  my  pofie  ftill. 

This  on  my  ring, 
This  by  my  pifture,  in  my  book  I  write: 

Whether  I  fing, 
Or  fay,  or  diftate,  this  is  my  delight. 

Invention  reft, 
Comparifonsgo  play,  wit  ufe  thy  will: 

Leffetben  the  lea fi 
Of  all  GoJt  mercies,  is  my  pofie  iUll. 


^  A  Parodie. 

SOuls  joy,  when  thou  art  gone. 
And  I  alone. 
Which  cannot  be, 
Becaufe  thou  doft  abide  with  me, 
And  I  depend  on  thee ; 

Yet  when  thou  doft  fuppreflc 

The  chcerfulnefle 
Of  ihy  abode. 

And  in  my  powers  not  ftirre  abroad, 
Bat  leave  me  to  my  load: 


178 


Tbe  Church. 


O  what  a  damp  and  fhade 
Doth  me  invade! 
No  ftormie  night 
Can  fo  afflidl  or  fo  affright. 

As  thy  eclipfed  light. 

Ah  Lord!  do  not  withdraw, 
Left  want  of  aw 
Make  Sinne  appeare; 
And  when  thou  doft  but  Ihine  leffe  cleare. 
Say,  that  thou  art  not  here. 

And  then  what  life  I  have. 

While  Sinne  doth  rave. 
And  falfly  boaft. 
That  I  may  feek,  but  thou  art  loft ; 
Thou  and  alone  thou  know'ft. 

O  what  a  deadly  cold 
Doth  me  infold! 
I  half  beleeve. 
That  Sinne  fayes  true:  but  while  I  grieve. 
Thou  cora'ft  and  doft  relieve. 


%  The  Elixer. 

TEach  me,  my  God  and  King, 
In  all  things  thee  to  fee. 
And  what  I  do  in  any  thing. 
To  do  it  as  for  thee: 

Not  rudely,as  a  beaft, 
To  runnc  into  an  aftion; 
But  flill  to  make  thee  prepofleft. 
And  give  it  his  perfeftion. 


The  Church.  17P 

A  man  that  looks  on  glafle. 
On  it  may  ftay  his  eye  ; 
Or  if  he  pleafeth,  through  it  pafle. 
And  then  the  heav'n  efpie. 

All  may  of  thee  partake: 
Nothing  can  be  fo  mean, 
Which  with  his  tinflure  (for  thy  fake) 
Will  not  grow  bright  and  clean. 

A  fervant  with  this  claufe 
Makes  drudgerie  divine: 
Who  fweeps  a  room,  as  for  thy  laws, 
Makes  that  and  th'  adion  fine. 

This  is  the  famous  ftone 
That  tumcth  all  to  gold: 
For  that  which  God  doth  touch  and  own 
Cannot  for  leflc  be  told. 


«  A  Wreath. 

A  Wreathed  garland  of  deferved  praife. 
Of  praife  deferved,  unto  thee  I  give, 
1  give  to  thee,  who  knoweft  all  mywayes. 
My  crooked  winding  wayes,wherein  I  live. 
Wherein  I  die,  not  live:  for  life  is  ftraight. 
Straight  as  a  line,  and  ever  tends  to  thee. 
To  thee,  who  art  more  farre  above  deceit. 
Then  deceit  feems  above  fimplicitie. 
Give  me  fimplicitie,  that  I  may  live. 
So  live  and  like,  that  I  may  know  thy  wayes. 
Know  them  and  praftife  them:  then  fhall  I  give 
For  this  poore  wreath,give  thee  a  crown  of  praifc. 

IT  Deatk 


i8o  The  Cburcb. 

f  Death. 

DEith,  chou  waft  once  an  uncouth  hideoiu  thing. 
Nothing  but  bones, 
The  fad  effefl  of  fadder  grones: 
Thy  mouth  was  open^but  thou  couldll  not  Cng. 

For  we  confider'd  thee  as  at  feme  fir 

Ortenyeares  hence. 
After  the  loffe  of  life  and  fenfe, 
Flefh  being  turn'd  to  duft,and  bones  to  (lickt. 

We  lookt  on  this  fide  of  thee,fhooting  (hort; 
Where  we  did  finde 
The  (hells  of  fledge  fouls  left  behinde. 
Dry  duft,  which  fheds  no  tears,  but  nnay  extort 

'"^But  fince  ourSaviours  death  did  pot  feme  bloud 
Into  thy  face; 
Thou  art  grown  fair  and  full  of  grac" 
Much  in  requell,  much  fought  for.as  a  good. 

For  we  do  now  behold  thee  gay  and  glad. 
As  at  dooms-day; 
When  fouls  ftiall  wear  their  new  aray. 
And  all  thy  bones  with  beautie  (hail  be  clad. 

Therefore  we  can  go  die  as  fieep,  and  truft 
Half  that  we  have 
Unto  an  honeft  faithfull  grave; 
Making  our  pillows  either  down,  or  duft.' 

f  Dooms- 


The  Church.  i8i 

%  Dooms-day. 

^^Ome  away, 
Make  no  delay. 
Summon  all  the  duft  to  rife. 
Till  it  ftirre,  and  rubbe  the  eyes; 
While  this  member  jogs  the  other, 
Each  one  whifpring,  Live  ym  bretbirf 

Come  away. 
Make  this  the  day. 
Duft ,  alas,  no  mufick  feels. 
But  thy  trumpet:  then  it  kneels. 
As  peculiar  notes  and  ftrains 
Cure  Tarantulaes  raging  pains. 

Come  away, 
Oraakenoftay! 
Let  the  graves  make  their  confeffion. 
Left  at  length  they  plead  poffeffion: 
Flelhes  ftubbornneffe  may  have 
Read  that  leffon  to  the  grave. 

Come  away, 
Thy  flock  doth  ftray. 
Some  to  windes  their  bodie  lend, 
Andinthjm  may  drown  a  friend: 
Some  in  noifome  vapours  grow 
To  a  plague  and  publick  wo. 

Come  away. 
Help  our  decay. 
Man  is  out  of  order  hurl'd, 
Parcel'd  out  to  all  the  world. 
Lord,  thy  broken  confort  raife. 
And  the  mufick  (hall  be  praife. 


1 82  The  Church. 

%  Judgement. 

ALmightie  Judge,how  fhall  poore  wretches  brook 
Thy  dreadful! look. 
Able  a  heart  of  iron  to  appall. 

When  thou  (halt  call 
For  ty'Ty  mans  peculiar  book? 

What  others  mean  to  do,  I  know  not  well; 

Yet  I  heare  tell, 
That  fome  will  turn  thee  to  fome  leaves  therein 
So  voidof  finne. 
That  they  in  merit  ftiall  excelL 

But  I  refolve,  when  thou  flialt  call  for  mine, 

That  to  decline. 
And  thruft  a  Tcftament  into  thy  hand: 

Let  that  be  fcann'd. 
Tliere  thou  /halt  finde  my  faults  are  thine. 


^  Heaven. 

OWho  will  fliow  me  thofe  delights  on  high? 
Ecbc.  J. 

Thou  Echo.thou  art  mortall,  all  men  know. 
Echo.  No. 

Wert  thou  not  born  among  the  trees  and  leaves? 
Echo.  Leaves. 

And  are  there  any  leaves,  that  ftill  abide? 

Echo.  Bide. 

What  leaves  are  they?  impart  the  matter  wholly. 

Echo.  Holy. 

Are  holy  leaves  the  Echo  then  of  blifle? 

Echo.  res. 

Then  tell  me,  what  is  that  fupremc  delight? 

Bcbt.  Light. 


Light 


The  Church.  183 

Light  to  the  minde:  what  (hall  the  will  enjoy? 

Echo.  Joy, 

Butare  there  cares  and  bufinefle  with  the  pleafure? 

Echo.  Leifure. 

Light, joy,  and  leifure;  butfliall  they  perfever? 
Efbo.  Ever. 


%  Love, 

LOvc  bade  me  welcome:  yet  my  foul  drew  back, 
Guiltie  of  duft'and  linne. 
But  quick-ey'd  Love.obferving  me  grow  flack 
From  my  firft  entrance  in. 
Drew  nearer  to  me,  fweetly  queftioning. 
If  Ilack'dany  thing. 

A  gueft,  I  anfwer'd,  worthy  to  be  here: 

Love  faid,  you  fliall  be  he, 

I  the  unkinde, ungrateful!?  Ah  my  deare, 
I  cannot  look  on  thee. 

Love  took  my  hand,  and  fmiling  did  reply. 

Who  made  the  eyes  but  I? 

Truth  Lord, but  I  have  marr'd  them:  letmyfhame 
Go  where  it  doth  deferve. 

And  know  you  not,  fayes  Love,  who  bore  the  blame? 
My  deare,  then  I  will  ferve. 

You  muft  fit  down,  fayes  Love,  and  tafte  my  meat: 
So  I  did  fit  and  eat. 


FINIS. 

Glorie  he  to  God  on  high,  and  on  earth 
peace,  good  will  towards  men. 


184 


The  Church  Militant. 

^Lmightie  Lord.who  from  thy  glorious 

throne 
Seeftand  ruleft  all  things  ev'n  as  one: 

fThe  fmalkft  ant  or  atome  knows  thy 
power, 

'  Known  alfotoeach  minute  of  an  houre: 
Much  more  do  Common-weals  acknowledge  thee. 
And  wrap  their  policies  in  thy  decree. 
Complying  with  thy  counfcls,  doing  nought 
Which  doth  not  meet  with  an  cternali  thought. 
But  above  all,  thy  Church  and  Spoufe  doth  prove 
Not  the  decrees  of  power,  but  bands  of  love. 
Early  didft  thou  arife  to  plant  this  vine. 
Which  might  the  more  indeareit  to  be  thine. 
Spices  come  from  the  Eaft;  fo  did  thy  Spoufe, 
Trimme  as  the  light,  fweet  as  the  laden  boughs 
Of  Noahs  (hadie  vine,  chafte  as  the  dove; 
Prepar'd  and  fitted  to  receive  thy  love. 
The  courfe  was  weft  ward,  that  the  funne  might  light 
As  well  ourunderftandingasourfight. 
Where  th'  Ark  did  reft,  there  Abraham  began 
To  bring  the  other  Ark  from  Canaan. 
Jl/ij/i'/ purfu'd  this:  but  King  Solomon 
Finifti'd  and  fixt  the  old  religion. 
When  it  grew  loofe,  theje ws  did  hope  in  vain 
By  nailing  Chrift  to  faften  it  again. 
But  to  the  Gentiles  he  bore  crofle  and  all. 
Rending  with  earthquakes  the  partition- wall: 
Onely  whereas  the  Ark  in  glorie  flione, 
Now  with  the  crofle,  as  with  a  ftaffe,  alone. 
Religion,  like  a  pilgrime,  weftward  bent, 

Knock- 


The  Church  Militant.  185 

Knocking  at  all  doores,  ever  as  Ihe  went. 
Yet  as  the  funno,  though  forward  be  his  flight, 
Liftens  behinde  him,  and  allows  fome  light. 
Til]  all  depart :  fo  went  the  Church  her  way, 
Letting,  while  one  foot  ftept,  the  other  ttay 
Among  the  eaftern  nations  for  a  time, 
Till  both  removed  to  the  weftern  clime. 
To  Egypt  firftfhe  came,  where  they  did  prove 
Wonders  of  anger  once,  but  now  of  love. 
The  ten  Commandments  there  did  flourifh  more 
Then  the  ten  bitter  plagues  had  done  before. 
Holy  Macarius  and  great  Antbonit 
Made  Pharaoh  Mojes,  changing  th'  hiftoric. 
Gcjhtn  was  darknefTc,  Egypt  full  of  lights, 
AV/«j  for  monfters  brought  forth  Ifraelites. 
Such  power  hath  mightie  Baptifme  to  produce 
For  things  mifshapen,  things  of  higheft  ufe. 
How  dtare  to  me,  O  Go  J,  thy  counjels  are ! 

iVho  may  with  thee  compart  ? 
Religion  thence  fled  into  Greece,  where  arts 
Gave  her  the  highell  place  in  ail  mens  hearts. 
Learning  was  pos'd,  Philofophie  was  fet, 

Sophifters  taken  in  a  fifhers  net. 
Plato  and  Arijiotle  were  at  a  lofle. 

And  wheel'd  about  again  to  fpell  Chrijl-Crojfe. 

Prayers  chas'd  fyllogifmes  into  their  den, 

And  Ergo  was  transform'd  into  Amen. 

Though  Greece  took  horfe  as  foon  as  Egypt  did. 

And  n^omezs  both;  yet  Egypt  fafterrid, 

And  fpcnt  her  period  and  prefixed  time 

Before  the  other.  Greece  being  paft  her  prime. 

Religion  went  to  1{ome,  fubduing  thofe, 

Who,  that  they  might  fubdue, made  all  their  foes. 

The  Warrier  his  deerc  skarres  no  more  refounds  , 

Butfeems  toyeeld  Chrift  hath  thegreater  wounds. 

Wounds  willingly  endur'd  to  work  his  blifle. 

Who  by  an  ambuflilofthisParadife.  The 


1 86         The  Church  Militant. 

The  great  heart  (loops,  and  taketh  from  the  dull 

A  fad  repentance,  not  the  fpoilsof  lull : 

Qyitting  his  fpear,Ieft  it  fliould  pierce  again 

Him  in  his  members,  who  for  him  wasflain. 

The  Shepherds  hookgrew  to  a  fccpter  here , 

Giving  new  names  and  numbers  to  the  yeare. 

But  th'  Empire  dwelt  in  Greece,  to  comfort  them 

Who  were  cut  (liort  in  J/exandenl\emme. 

In  both  of  thefe  Prowefle  and  Arts  did  tame 

And  tune  mens  hearts  againft  the  Gofpel  came: 

Which  ufing,  and  not  fearing  skill  in  th'  one. 

Or  ftrength  in  th'  other,  did  ereft  her  throne. 

Many  a  rent  and  ftruggling  th'  Empire  knew, 

(  As  dying  things  are  wont)  untill  itUew 

At  length  to  Germanic,  ftill  weftward  bending. 

And  there  the  Churches  feftivall  attending: 

That  as  before  Empire  and  Arts  made  way, 

^For  no  lefle  Harbingers  would  fervc  then  they) 

So  they  might  ftill,  and  point  us  out  the  place 

Where  firft  theChurch  fhould  raifeher  dowii-caft  face. 

Strength  levels  grounds.  Art  makes  a  garden  there; 

Then  fliowres  Religion,  and  makes  all  to  bear. 

Spain  in  the  Empire  fliar'd  with  Germanie, 

Bux.  England'm  the  higher  viftorie: 

Giving  the  Church  a  crown  to  keep  her  ftate, 

And  not  go  lefle  then  fhe  had  done  of  late. 

Conftantines  Britilh  line  meant  this  of  old. 

And  did  this  myfterie  wrap  up  and  fold 

Within  a  fheet  oi  paper,  which  was  rent 

From  times  great  Chronicle  ,  and  hither  fent. 

Thus  both  the  Church  and  Sunne  together  ran 

Unto  the  fartheft  old  meridian. 

How  deare  to  me,  O  God,  thy  counfels  are  ! 

Who  may  with  thee  compare? 
Much  about  one  and  the  fame  time  and  place. 
Both  where  and  when  the  Church  began  her  race, 

Sinne 


The  Church  Militant,  1 87 

Sinne  did  fet  out  of  Eaftern  Babylon, 

And  traveli'd  weft  ward  alfo :  journeying  on 

He  chid  the  Church  away,  where  e're  he  came. 

Breaking  her  peace,and  tainting  her  good  name. 

At  firft  he  got  to  Egypt,  and  did  few 

Gardens  of  gods,  which  cv'ry  yeare  did  grow, 

Frefh  and  fine  deities.  They  were  at  great  coft, 

Who  for  a  god  cleareiy  a  fallet  loft. 

Ah,what  a  thing  is  man  devoid  of  grace. 

Adoring  garlicic  with  an  humble  face. 

Begging  his  food  of  that  which  he  may  eat. 

Starving  the  while  he  worfhippeth  his  meat! 

Who  makes  a  root  his  god,  how  low  is  he. 

If  God  and  man  be  fever'd  infinitely! 

What  wretchednefTe  can  give  him  any  room, 

Whofe  houfe  is  foul,  while  he  adores  his  broom? 

None  will  belcevc  this  now,  though  money  be 

In  us  the  fame  transplanted  foolerie. 

Thus  Sinne  in  Egypt  fneaked  for  a  while; 

His  higheft  was  an  ox  or  crocodile, 

And  fuch  poore  game.Thence  he  to  Greece ioth  pafle. 

And  being  craftier  much  then  Goodneffe  was, 

He  left  behinde  him  garrifons  of  finnes 

To  make  good  that  which  ev'ry  day  he  vvinnes. 

Here  Sinne  took  hcart,and  for  a  garden-bed 

Rich  fhrines  and  oracles  he  purchafed: 

He  grew  a  gallant,  and  would  needs  foretell 

As  well  what  ftiould  befall,  as  what  befell. 

Nay,  he  became  a  poet,  and  wouldfcrve 

His  pills  of  fublimate  in  that  conferve. 

The  world  came  both  with  hands  and  purfcs  full 

To  this  great  lotterie,  and  all  would  pull. 

But  all  was  glorious  cheating,  brave  deceit. 

Where  fome  poore  truths  were  fhuffled  for  a  bait 

To  credit  him,  and  to  difcredit  thofe 

Who  after  him  fhould  braver  truths  difclofe. 

From 


l88  The  Church  Militant. 

From  Greece\iii  went  to  Rome:  and  as  before 
He  waj  a  God,  now  he's  an  Emperour. 
Hero  and  others  lodg'd  him  bravely  there, 
Put  him  in  trull  to  rule  the  Romane  fphcre.- 
Glorie  was  his  chief  inftrumentof  old: 
Pieafurc  fuececded  flraight,  when  that  grew  cold. 
Which  foon  was  blown  to  fuch  a  mightie  flame. 
That  though  our  Saviour  did  deAroy  the  game, 
Difparkingoracles,and  all  their  treafure, 
Setting  affliftion  to  encounter  pieafurc ; 
Yet  did  a  rogue  with  hope  of  carnall  joy 
Cheat  the  moft  fubtill  nations.  Who  fo  coy, 
So  trimme,  as  Greece  and  Egypt?  yet  their  hearts 
Arc  given  over,  for  their  curious  arts. 
To  fuch  Mahometan  ftupidities, 
A«  the  old  heathen  would  deem  prodigies. 
Hito  deare  to  me,  O  Go  J,  thy  counjeh  are! 
Who  may  with  thee  compart? 
Onely  the  Weft  and  Rome  do  keep  them  free 
From  this  contagious  infidelitie. 
And  this  is  all  the  Rock,  whereof  they  boaft, 
Ai  Rome  will  one  day  finde  unto  her  coft. 
Sinne  being  not  able  to  extirpate  quite 
The  Churches  here,  bravely  refolv'd  one  night 
To  be  a  Church-man  too.and  wear  a  Mitre: 
The  old  debauched  ruiEan  would  turn  writer. 
I  fawhim  in  his  ftudie,  where  he  fate 
Bufie  in  controverfies  fprung  of  late. 
A  gown  and  pen  became  him  wondrous  well: 
His  grave  afpedl  had  more  of  heav'n  then  hell; 
Onely  there  was  a  handfome  piflure  by. 
To  which  he  lent  a  corner  of  his  eye. 
As  Sinne  in  Greece  a  Prophet  was  before. 
And  in  old  Romez  mightie  Emperour; 
So  now  being  Prieft  he  plainly  did  profcffe 
To  make  a  jeft  of  Chrifts  three  offices: 


The 


The  Church  Militant.         189 

The  rather  fince  his  fcatter'd  jugglings  were 

United  now  in  one  both  time  and  fphere. 

From  Egypt  he  took  pettie  deities. 

From  Greece  oracular  infallibilities, 

And  from  old  ^sct^  the  libertie  of  pleafure. 

By  freedifpcnfingsof  the  Churches  treafure. 

Then  in  memoriall  of  his  ancient  throne 

He  did  furname  his  palace,  Babylon. 

Yet  that  he  might  the  better  gain  all  nation*. 

And  make  that  name  good  by  their  tranfmigrations; 

i-'rom  ail  thefe  places,  but  at  divers  times. 

He  took  iine  vizards  to  conceal  his  crimes: 

From  Egypt  Anchorifme  and  retiredneffe, 

Learning  from  Grififr^,from  old  ^oraif  ftatelincfie: 

And  blending  thefe  he  carri'd  all  mens  eyes. 

While  Truth  fat  by,  counting  his  vidlories: 

Whereby  he  grew  apace  and  fcorn'd  to  ufe 

Such  force  as  once  did  captivate  the  Jews; 

But  did  bewitch,  and  finely  work  each  nation 

f nto  a  voluntarie  tranfmigration. 

All  pofte  to  1{cmc:  Princes  fubmit  their  necki 

liither  t'  his  pqblick  foot  or  private  tricks. 

It  did  not  fit  hisgravitie  to  (Urre, 

Nor  his  long  journey  ,  nor  his  gout  and  furre. 

Therefore  he  fent  out  able  minifters, 

Statcfmen  within, without  doorcs  cloifteren: 

Who  wit  hout  fpear,  or  fword,  or  other  drumme 

Then  what  was  in  their  tongue,  did  overcome; 

And  having  conquer'd,  did  fo  llrangely  rule. 

That  the  whole  world  did  feem  but  the  Popes  mule. 

As  new  and  old  1{ome  did  one  Empire  twift; 

So  both  together  are  one  Antichrift, 

Yet  with  two  faces,as  their  JanusviA%; 

Being  in  this  their  old  crackt  lookirg-glafle. 

Horn  dtare  to  me,  O-  God,  thy  counfels  are  ! 

Who  may  with  thee  compare  f 

Thus 


190         The  Church  Militant. 

Thus  Sinne  triumphs  in  Weftern  Babylon; 
YetnotasSinne,  but  as  Religion. 
Of  his  two  thrones  he  made  the  latter  bcft. 
And  to  defray  his  journey  from  the  eaft. 
Old  and  new  Babylon  are  to  hell  and  night. 
As  is  the  moon  and  funne  to  heav'n  and  light. 
When  th'  one  did  fet,  the  other  did  take  place, 
Confronting  equally  the  law  and  grace. 
They  are  hells  land-marks,  Satans  double  creft: 
They  are  Sinnes  nipples,  feeding  th'  eaft  and  weft. 
But  as  in  vice  the  copie  ilill  exceeds 
The  pattern,  but  not  fo  in  vertuous  deeds; 
So  though  Smne  made  his  latter  feat  the  better, 
The  latter  Church  is  to  the  firft  a  debtor. 
The  fecond  Temple  could  not  reach  the  firft: 
And  the  late  reformation  never  durft 
Compare  with  ancient  times  and  purer  yeares; 
But  in  the  Jews  and  us  deferveth  tears. 
Nay,  it  Ihall  ev'ry  yeare  decreafe  and  fade; 
Till  fuch  a  darknefle  do  the  world  invade 
At  Chrifts  laft  coming,  as  his  firft  did  findc: 
Yet  muft  there  fuch  proportions  be  aflign'd 
To  thefe  diminifhings,  as  is  between 
Thefpacious  world  and  ]urie  to  be  feen. 
Religion  ftands  on  tip-toe  in  our  land, 
Readie  to  pafFe  to  the  American  ftrand. 
When  height  of  malice,  and  prodigious  lufts. 
Impudent  finning,  witchcrafts,  and  diftrufts 
(  The  marks  of  future  bane^  fhall  fill  our  cup 
Unto  the  brimme,  and  make  our  meafure  up; 
When  Sein  ftiall  fwallow  Tiber,  and  the  Thames 
By  letting  in  them  both,  pollutes  her  ftreams: 
When  Italic  of  uslhall  have  her  will, 
And  all  her  calender  of  finnes  fulfill; 
Whereby  one  may  forteil,  what  finnes  next  yearc 
Shall  both  in  France  and  England  domineer: 

Then 


'The  Church  Militant.  191 

Then  fhall  Religion  to  America  flee: 

They  have  their  times  of  Gofpel,  ev'n  as  we. 

My  God,  thou  doft  prepare  for  them  a  way 

By  carrying  firft  their  gold  from  them  away: 

For  gold  and  grace  did  never  yet  agree: 

Religion  alwaies  fides  with  povertie. 

We  think  we  rob  them,  but  we  think  amiffe: 

We  are  more  poore,  and  they  more  rich  by  this. 

Thou  wilt  revenge  their  quarrell,  making  grace 

To  pay  our  debts,  and  leave  our  ancient  place 

To  go  to  them,  while  that  which  now  their  nation 

But  lends  to  us,  ftiall  be  our  defolation. 

Yet  as  the  Church  (hall  thither  weftvvard  flie. 

So  Sinne  fhall  trace  and  dog  her  inftantly: 

They  have  their  period  alfo  and  fet  times 

Both  for  their  vertuous  aflions  and  their  crimes. 

Ai)d  where  of  old  the  Empire  and  the  Arts 

U  (her'd  the  Gofpel  ever  in  mens  hearts, 

Sfain  hath  done  one;  when  Arts  perform  the  other, 

The  Church  Ihall  come,  &  Sinne  the  Church  Ihall  fmo- 

Thatwhen  they  haue  accomplilhed  the  round,  (ther: 

And  met  in  th'  eaft  their  firft  and  ancient  found. 

Judgement  may  meet  them  both&fearch  them  round. 

Thus  do  both  lights,  as  well  in  Church  as  Sunne, 

Light  one  another,  and  together  runne. 

Thus  alfo  Sinne  and  Darknefle  follow  ftill 

The  Church  and  Sunne  with  ail  their  power  and  skill. 

But  as  the  Sunne  Ihll  goes  both  weft  and  eaft; 

So  alfo  did  the  Church  by  going  weft 

Still  eaft  ward  go;becaufe  it  drew  more  neare 

To  time  and  place,  where  judgement  (hall  appeare. 

Hoia  deare  to  me,  O  God,  thy  counfels  are! 

Who  may  with  thee  compare  •" 


f  L'Envoy. 


•[[  L' Envoy. 

King  of  glorie.  King  of  peace. 
With  the  one  make  warre  to  ceafe; 
With  the  other  blefle  thy  fheep, 
Thcc  to  love, in  thee  tofleep. 
Let  not  Sinne  dcvourc  thy  fold. 
Bragging  that  thy  bloud  is  cold, 
Tliat  thy  deathis  alfo  dead, 
W  hile  his  conqucfts  day  ly  fpread; 
That  thy  flelh  hath  loft  his  food, 
And  thy  CrofTe  is  common  wood. 
Choke  him,  let  him  fay  no  more, 
Butreferve  his  breath  in  ftore, 
Till  thy  conqucfts  and  his  fall 
Make  his  fighs  to  ufe  it  all. 
And  then  bargain  with  thewinde 
To  difcharge  whatis  behinde. 


I 


Blejfed  be  God  alone, 
Thrice  blejfed  Three  in  One. 


FINIS. 


The  titles  of  the  fevcrall  poems 
contained  in  this  book. 


A 

AJron  1 68 

Affliaion     38.53. 

64.  82.  89. 
Agottie  29 

Altar  1 8 

Anagram  of  the  Virgin 

Marie  69 

Tt  all  Angels  and  Saints 

ibid. 
The  Anfwer  163 

A  'Dialogue- Ant  heme 

164 
Antiphon  4S-8s 

Arti.lerie  tjz 

Affurance  149 

Avarice  69 

B 

THe  Bag  145 

The  Banquet     175 
/f.  Baptijme  36 

Bitter-fweet  165 

The  Britijh  Church  \oz 
The  Bunch  0/ Grapes  1 20 
Bufinejfe  loj 


7^f  Cfl//  1 50 

Charms  and  knots  88 

Chriftmas  72 

Church-fioore  58 

Church-lock  and  key  57 

Church  Militant  1 84 

Church-monuments  56 

Churcb-mufick  57 

Church-porch  1 
Church-rents  IS  fchijmes 

134 

Church-windows  59 

C la/ping  of  hands  1 5 1 

The  Collar  147 
C»/#  3.  3.  Our  life,  i^c. 

77 

H.  Communion  43 

Complaining  137 

Self-Condemnation  165 

Confefsion  1 1 8 

Confcience  98 

Conftantie  63 

Content  60 

TheCroffe  158 

I  r-6* 


T 


He  "Dawxing 
'Death 

'ecay 


104 
180 


'Deniall  71 

'Tiiekgut  1 07 

TherDiJeharge  138 

'Difcipline  1 73 

liivinitie  1 27 

Tiooms-day  181 

'Dotage  161 

'Dulneffe  io8 
£ 

E^/"-  33 

Eajler-tttings  34,35 

7'if/  Elixer  1 78 

Employment  ^9-70 

L'Envey  192 
f/iit.?/;  4.  30.  Grieve  not, 

i^e.  128 

Evenfong  55 

F/^//*  41 

715^  Familie  1 30 

7'^f  Flower  160 

Tl^^'  jP«/7  170 

7!&f  ForertiMHtrt  ibid. 

Prailtie  62 
G 

GIddineJfe  1 19 

r.^^  G//j«<-«  166 

r*^  G//«//«  1 48 

Goti-friday  30 

Grate  5» 

Gratefulntft  1 16 

O'//"  158 


HEaven 
The  Holdfaft 
Home 
Hope 
Humilitie 
A  true  Hymne 

I 

jE/u 

J    The  Jews 
The  Invitation 
Jordan 
]o/ephs  coat 
]udgement 
]uftice 


182- 
«37 

99 
"  + 

61 

162 

10,- 
146 

48.9s 

>S3 

i8z 
88.13$ 


LEnt 
Life 
Longing 

Love-joy 


78 
87 

142 
45,46.183 

109 

121 


Love  unknown 

M 

MAn  I3 

Mans  medley  \  2  3 
S.Marie  Magdalene  168 
Mjtlens  54 

Miferie 

Mortification 

Nature 

0 

OBedience 
The  Odour 
An  Offering 


26 

9* 
90 

37 

96 
169 


Faradijt 


p 

PAraiife  i  z  J 

J  Parodie  177 

Ptacf  1 1 7 
Tit  Pearl,Matt.\^.    81 

Pcrirrhanterium  i 

The  Pilgrimage  1 3  5 

The  Pofte  177 
Praift           53.140.151 

Prayer  43.95 

The  Priefthood  154 

Providence  1 09 

The  2  J  Pfalme  167 

TA/  Pulley  1 5  3 


Jliddi 
The  Siuip 


61 

103 


THe^idditie 


R 

REdempticn  3 1 

Repentance  40 

The  Reprijall  28 

TheRefe  172 

T/T/  Sacrifice  1 9 

Saints  vide  Angels 
Schi/mes  vide  Church- 
rents 
M.  Seripture  50 

The  Search  156 


Sepulchre  3  2 
Sighs  and  grines         75 

•J"""  37-SS 

Sinnes  round  114 

T/fr^  Sinner  30 

S;'i5»  99 

The  Size  131 

Ti^  5o»»/  162 

rZifT  5/arr?  65 

The  Storm  125 

•  Submifsion  87 

Sunday  66 

Supcrliminare  1 7 

r 

T/fr  Temper  46,47 
ri"/"  Thanks-giving 

27 

T/Vw/  1 1 5 

Trinitie- Sunday  59 

y 

VAnitie  77- '04 

Ungratefulnejfe  y^ 

Unkindnejfe  86 

fV 

THe  Water-courJe\()\ 

Whitfunday  5 1 

r*/  ifcr/i/  76 

.rf  Wreath  179 


FINIS. 


fm  small  */*.,  antique  brndtHg;^  \qs,  fid.  ;  facsimile  aniiqug  calf, 
2is.  ;  9est  antique  polished  Morocco,  xl.  \\s.  (>d.  ;  large  paper 
copies^  in  paper  boards,  151.;  in-  Roxburghs  binding,  xl,  it.; 
in  Turkey  Morocco  antique^  %l.  tea. 

PARADISE     LOST, 

A     POEM,     WRITTEN     IN     TEN     BOOKS, 

Bv   JOHN    MILTON. 

Being  a  ffsfsimiie  reproduction  of  tlu  first  edition  published  in 

r667.      With  an  Introduction  by  David  Masson,  M.A., 

LL.D.,  author  of  the  *'  Life  of  Milton,"  ^c. 

This  edition  is  in  every  respect  a  faithful  reproduction  of  the  first 
.  edition  of  "  Paradise  Lost."  The  Text  is  a  literal  facsimile  of  the 
Editio  Princeps;  the  Type  is  from  an  old  fount  exactly  resembling 
the  original :  the  Paper  on  which  it  is  printed  is  a  close  imitation  of 
the  water-lined  gjey  paper  used  in  the  middle  of  the  17th  century, 
and  the  Binding  represents  the  brown  sheep  in  which  the  work  was 
first  issued. 

Ik  crovm  Bvo. ,  bound  in  contemporary  binding  or  in  paper  boardt, 
5r.  6rf. ;  in  facsimile  calf,  lor.  6d.  ;  in  best  Turkey  Morocco,  \L  w. 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS, 

As  originally  published  bv  John  Bunvah,  being  a  facsimile  repro- 
duction of  the  first  edition  published  in  1678,  ^wkich  only 
one  copy  is  known  to  exist  at  the  present  day. 

The  special  characteristics  of  the  first  edition  are  here  carefully 
pcesenred.  The  colloquial  language*  quaint  spelling,  the  curious 
•ide-notes  of  the  original  teat*,  as  well  as  the  peculiar  forms  and  mix- 
turesof  types,  the  irregular  use  of  capitals  and  italics,  arc  faithfully 
reproduced,  thusenabung  the  modem  reader  to  realize  the  rude  form 
in  which  Joho  Bunyan  first  put  his  immortal  allegory  before  the 
readers  of  his  own  day. 

•»*  A  few  copies  on  large  Paper,  with  the  curious  woodcuts  from 
the  early  editions,  are  still  on  hand.  Price  2\s.,  in  Hoxburgke 
binding. 

In  crown  8w».,  antique  binding  or  paper  boards,  6s.  ;  in  facsimile 
calf,  las,  6d. ;  antique  Turkey  Morocco,  au.  ;  large  paper  copies, 
in  Roxburghe  binding,  %\s.i  antique  Turkey  Morocco,  •/.  \ox. 

THE    COM  PLEAT  ANGLER; 

0»,     THE     CONTEMPLATIVE     MAN*S     RECREATION, 

Br  ISAAC  WALTON. 

This  reprint  of  the  first  edition,  published  in  i<S3,  is  printed  on 
paper  similar  to  that  of  the  original.  The  quaint  title-page,  the  very 
clever  drawings  of  fishes,  and  the  antique  head-pieces  and  tail-pieces, 
are  all  faithfiuly  copied  by  a  photographic  process,  Which  exactly 
reproduces  the  original. 


ELLTOT  STOCK.  6a,  Patermoster  Row,  London,  K.C 


I 


BINDING  SECT.     ^PR  10^960 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


FR  Herbert,  George 

3507  The  temple 

T45 
1876 


